https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1979 1979 - Wikipedia 1979 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article is about the year 1979. For other uses, see 1979 (disambiguation). 1979 January February March April May June July August September October November December Calendar year Millennium: 2nd millennium Centuries: 19th century 20th century 21st century Decades: 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s Years: 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1979 by topic Subject Animation Anime Archaeology Architecture Art Aviation Awards Comics Film Home video Literature Poetry Meteorology Music Country Heavy metal Hip hop Jazz Rail transport Radio Science Spaceflight Sports Football Television American British Scottish Italian Video gaming By country Australia Bangladesh Belgium Bulgaria Brazil Canada People's Republic of China France Germany Greece India Ireland Iran Israel Japan Kuwait Luxembourg Malaysia Mexico New Zealand Norway Pakistan Philippines Singapore South Africa South Korea Sweden Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States Lists of leaders Sovereign states Sovereign state leaders Territorial governors Religious leaders Law Birth and death categories Births Deaths Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments Disestablishments Works category Works Introductions v t e 1979 in various calendars Gregorian calendar 1979 MCMLXXIX Ab urbe condita 2732 Armenian calendar 1428 ?? ???? Assyrian calendar 6729 Bahá'í calendar 135–136 Balinese saka calendar 1900–1901 Bengali calendar 1386 Berber calendar 2929 British Regnal year 27 Eliz. 2 – 28 Eliz. 2 Buddhist calendar 2523 Burmese calendar 1341 Byzantine calendar 7487–7488 Chinese calendar ??? (Earth Horse) 4675 or 4615     — to — ??? (Earth Goat) 4676 or 4616 Coptic calendar 1695–1696 Discordian calendar 3145 Ethiopian calendar 1971–1972 Hebrew calendar 5739–5740 Hindu calendars  - Vikram Samvat 2035–2036  - Shaka Samvat 1900–1901  - Kali Yuga 5079–5080 Holocene calendar 11979 Igbo calendar 979–980 Iranian calendar 1357–1358 Islamic calendar 1399–1400 Japanese calendar Sh?wa 54 (?????) Javanese calendar 1910–1912 Juche calendar 68 Julian calendar Gregorian minus 13 days Korean calendar 4312 Minguo calendar ROC 68 ??68? Nanakshahi calendar 511 Thai solar calendar 2522 Tibetan calendar ???? (male Earth-Horse) 2105 or 1724 or 952     — to — ???? (female Earth-Goat) 2106 or 1725 or 953 Unix time 283996800 – 315532799 Wikimedia Commons has media related to 1979. 1979 (MCMLXXIX) was a common year starting on Monday of the Gregorian calendar, the 1979th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 979th year of the 2nd millennium, the 79th year of the 20th century, and the 10th and last year of the 1970s decade. Calendar year Contents 1 Events 1.1 January 1.2 February 1.3 March 1.4 April 1.5 May 1.6 June 1.7 July 1.8 August 1.9 September 1.10 October 1.11 November 1.12 December 1.13 Date unknown 2 Births 2.1 January 2.2 February 2.3 March 2.4 April 2.5 May 2.6 June 2.7 July 2.8 August 2.9 September 2.10 October 2.11 November 2.12 December 3 Deaths 3.1 January 3.2 February 3.3 March 3.4 April 3.5 May 3.6 June 3.7 July 3.8 August 3.9 September 3.10 October 3.11 November 3.12 December 4 Nobel Prizes 5 Media 6 References 7 Further reading Events[edit] January[edit] Main article: January 1979 January 1 United Nations Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim heralds the start of the International Year of the Child.[1] Many musicians donate to the Music for UNICEF Concert fund, among them ABBA, who write the song Chiquitita to commemorate the event. The United States and the People's Republic of China establish full diplomatic relations. Following a deal agreed during 1978, French carmaker Peugeot completes a takeover of American manufacturer Chrysler's European operations, which are based in Britain's former Rootes Group factories, as well as the former Simca factories in France. January 7 – Cambodian–Vietnamese War: The People's Army of Vietnam and Vietnamese-backed Cambodian insurgents announce the fall of Phnom Penh, Cambodia, and the collapse of the Pol Pot regime. Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge retreat west to an area along the Thai border, ending large-scale fighting. January 8 – Whiddy Island Disaster: The French tanker Betelgeuse explodes at the Gulf Oil terminal at Bantry, Ireland; 50 are killed. January 9 – The Music for UNICEF Concert is held at the United Nations General Assembly to raise money for UNICEF and promote the Year of the Child. It is broadcast the following day in the United States and around the world. Hosted by the Bee Gees, other performers include Donna Summer, ABBA, Rod Stewart and Earth, Wind & Fire. A soundtrack album is later released. January 16 – Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi flees Iran with his family, relocating to Egypt after a year of turmoil. January 19 – Former U.S. Attorney General John N. Mitchell is released on parole after 19 months at a federal prison in Alabama. January 21 – The Pittsburgh Steelers stake their claim as the NFL team of the 1970s by beating the Dallas Cowboys 35–31 at Miami's Orange Bowl in Super Bowl XIII. January 22 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Mutukula: The Tanzanian military captures the Ugandan border town of Mutukula after a short battle. January 25 – Pope John Paul II arrives in Mexico City for his first visit to Mexico, mainly for 1979's Latin American Episcopal Conference (CELAM) or Conference of Puebla. January 29 – Cleveland Elementary School shooting (San Diego): Brenda Ann Spencer opens fire at a school in San Diego, California, killing two faculty members and wounding eight students and a police officer. Her justification for the action, "I don't like Mondays", inspires the Boomtown Rats to make a song of the same name. February[edit] Main article: February 1979 February 1 Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returns to Tehran, Iran after nearly 15 years of exile.[2] Former Sex Pistols bassist Sid Vicious is released on bail after undergoing a 55-day forcible detoxification programme at Rikers Island prison. He suffers a heroin overdose and dies around midnight. February 3 – Ayatollah Khomeini creates the Council of the Islamic Revolution. February 7 Iranian Revolution: Supporters of Ayatollah Khomeini take over the Iranian law enforcement, courts and government administration; the final session of the Iranian National Consultative Assembly is held. Pluto moves inside Neptune's orbit for the first time since either was known to science. Nazi criminal Josef Mengele suffers a stroke and drowns while swimming in Bertioga, Brazil. His remains are found in 1985. February 10–11 – Iranian Revolution: The Iranian army withdraws to its barracks leaving power in the hands of Ayatollah Khomeini, ending the Pahlavi dynasty. February 11 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Simba Hills: The Tanzanian military began its assault on the Simba Hills near the town of Kakuuto. February 12 – Prime Minister Hissène Habré starts the Battle of N'Djamena in an attempt to overthrow Chad's President Félix Malloum. February 13 The intense February 13, 1979 windstorm strikes western Washington and sinks a 1.3 kilometres (0.81 mi) long section of the Hood Canal Bridge. The Guardian Angels are formed in New York City as an unarmed organization of young crime fighters. February 14 – In Kabul, Muslim extremists kidnap the American ambassador to Afghanistan, Adolph Dubs, who is killed during a gunfight between his kidnappers and police.[3] February 15 – A suspected gas explosion in a Warsaw bank kills 49. February 17 – The People's Republic of China invades northern Vietnam, launching the Sino-Vietnamese War. February 18 The Sahara Desert experiences snow for 30 minutes.[4] The 1979 Daytona 500 is televised on CBS, the first ever full airing of a 500-mile race on US television, Richard Petty wins after Cale Yarborough and Donnie Allison battle for first place on the final lap and crash out, leading to a fist fight. This race brought NASCAR to a wider audience.[citation needed] The Khomeini government in Iran cuts diplomatic relations with Israel. February 21 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Gayaza Hills: A Tanzanian brigade successfully dislodged Ugandan forces from the Gayaza Hills. The battle is hard-fought, and the Tanzanians suffer their largest number of casualties in a single engagement of the war. February 22 – Saint Lucia becomes independent from the United Kingdom. February 26 A total solar eclipse, the last visible from the continental United States until 2017, arcs over northwestern conterminous USA and central Canada ending in Greenland. A partial solar eclipse is visible over almost all of North America and Central America including the eastern half of Alaska and the western half of the UK.[5] The Superliner railcar enters revenue service with Amtrak. February 27 The annual Mardi Gras celebration in New Orleans is cancelled due to a strike called by the New Orleans Police Department. The Soviet oil tanker Antonio Gramsci suffers a minor shipwreck in shallow waters shortly after leaving shore in Ventspils, resulting in a 5,000 ton oil spill, the largest that has ever occurred on the Baltic Sea.[6] March[edit] Main article: March 1979 March 1 Scottish devolution referendum: Scotland votes in favour for a Scottish Assembly, which is not implemented due to failing a condition that at least 40% of the electorate must support the proposal; in a Welsh devolution referendum, Wales votes against devolution. Philips publicly demonstrate a prototype of an optical digital audio disc at a press conference in Eindhoven, Netherlands. March 2 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Tororo: Ugandan rebels attack and capture the town of Tororo. March 4 The U.S. Voyager 1 spaceprobe photos reveal Jupiter's rings. Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Tororo: The Ugandan military retakes Tororo from rebels. March 5 – Voyager 1 makes its closest approach to Jupiter at 277,000 kilometres (172,000 mi). March 7 – The largest Magnetar (Soft gamma repeater) event is recorded. March 8 – Philips demonstrates the compact disc publicly for the first time. Thousands of women participate in the International Women's Day Protests in Tehran, 1979 against the introduction of mandatory veiling during the Iranian revolution. March 10 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Lukaya: The Ugandan military, a Libyan expeditionary force and allied Palestine Liberation Organisation militants begin a counter-offensive against Tanzanian troops in south-central Uganda. The Ugandan-led alliance retakes Lukaya after a short clash with the Tanzanian military. March 11 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Lukaya: The Tanzanian military counter-attacks at Lukaya, completely defeating the Ugandan-led alliance. This defeat permanently cripples the Ugandan military. March 13 – Maurice Bishop leads a successful coup in Grenada. His government will be crushed by American intervention in 1983. March 14 – In China, a Hawker Siddeley Trident crashes into a factory near Beijing, killing 31 people on the ground and injuring 200. March 16 – End of major hostilities in the Sino-Vietnamese War. March 17 – The Penmanshiel Tunnel in the UK collapses, killing two workers. March 19 - C-SPAN, an American television channel focusing on government and public affairs, is launched. March 18 – Ten miners die in a methane gas explosion at Golborne Colliery near Wigan, Greater Manchester, England.[7] March 22 – The NHL votes to approve its merger with the WHA, effective in the fall. March 25 – The first fully functional Space Shuttle orbiter, Columbia, is delivered to the Kennedy Space Center, to be prepared for its first launch. March 26 In a ceremony at the White House, President Anwar Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel sign an Egypt–Israel Peace Treaty. Michigan State University, led by Earvin "Magic" Johnson, defeats Larry Bird-led Indiana State 75–64 in the NCAA tournament championship game at Salt Lake City. March 28 In Britain, James Callaghan's minority Labour government loses a motion of confidence by one vote, forcing a general election which is to be held on 3 May.[8] America's most serious nuclear power plant accident occurs, at Three Mile Island, Pennsylvania. March 29 – Sultan Yahya Petra of Kelantan, the 6th Yang di-Pertuan Agong (Head of State) of Malaysia, dies in office. He is replaced by Sultan Ahmad Shah of Pahang. March 30 – Airey Neave, Conservative M.P. in the British House of Commons, is killed, presumably by an Irish National Liberation Army bomb in the car park for the Houses of Parliament. March 31 The last British soldier (belonging to the Royal Navy) leaves the Maltese Islands, after 179 years of presence. Malta declares its Freedom Day (Jum il-Helsien). Milk and Honey win the Eurovision Song Contest 1979 for Israel, with the song Hallelujah. April[edit] Main article: April 1979 April 1 Iran's government becomes an Islamic Republic by a 98% vote, overthrowing the Shah officially. Nickelodeon launches from QUBE's Pinwheel experiment and begins airing on various Warner Cable systems beginning in Buffalo, New York, expanding its audience reach. Dale Earnhardt Sr wins his first career NASCAR race at the 1979 Southeastern 500 at Bristol Motor Speedway. He would go on to win 76 races and 7 championships during his career. April 1–18 – Police lock Andreas Mihavecz in a holding cell in Bregenz, Austria and forget about him, leaving him there without food or drink. April 2 – Sverdlovsk anthrax leak: A Soviet biowarfare laboratory at Sverdlovsk accidentally releases airborne anthrax spores, killing 66 plus an unknown amount of livestock. It is a violation of the Biological Weapons Convention of 1972. April 2 - In Japan, the channel of TV Asahi premieres Doraemon. April 4 – Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto is executed by hanging for the murder of a political opponent. April 5 - Ex-premier Pol Jar flees out of Cambodia April 6 – Student protests break out in Nepal. April 7 – In Japan, Yoshiyuki Tomino directs Mobile Suit Gundam, the first series of the metaseries of the same name. April 10 – A tornado hits Wichita Falls, Texas, killing 42 people (the most notable of 26 tornadoes that day). April 11 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Fall of Kampala: Tanzanian troops take Kampala, the capital of Uganda; Idi Amin flees. April 13 – The La Soufrière volcano erupts in St. Vincent and the Grenadines. April 15 – 1979 Montenegro earthquake: A major earthquake Mw6.9 strikes Montenegro (then part of Yugoslavia) and parts of Albania, causing extensive damage to coastal areas and taking 136 lives; the old town of Budva is devastated. April 17 – Schoolchildren in the Central African Republic are arrested (and around 100 killed) for protesting against compulsory school uniforms. An African judicial commission later determines that Emperor Jean-Bédel Bokassa "almost certainly" took part in the massacre. April 22 – The Albert Einstein Memorial is unveiled at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C. April 23 – Fighting breaks out in London between the Anti-Nazi League and the Metropolitan Police's Special Patrol Group; protester Blair Peach receives fatal injuries during the incident, now officially attributed to the SPG. May[edit] Main article: May 1979 May 1 – Greenland is granted limited autonomy from Denmark, with its own Parliament sitting in Nuuk. May 3 – The 1979 United Kingdom general election for the House of Commons takes place, giving the Conservatives a majority, and electing Margaret Thatcher as the nation's first woman prime minister, ending the rule of James Callaghan's Labour government.[9] May 8 – Ten shoppers die in a fire at the Woolworths department store in Manchester city centre in England. May 9 The Salvadoran Civil War begins. A Unabomber bomb injures Northwestern University graduate student John Harris. May 10 – The Federated States of Micronesia becomes self-governing. May 15 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Lira: Tanzania and its Uganda National Liberation Front allies capture Lira, Uganda, from the forces of Ugandan dictator Idi Amin. May 21 Dan White is convicted of manslaughter, rather than murder, for the assassination of San Francisco Mayor George Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk, after using what would become known as the "Twinkie defense" and persuading a jury that the crime was not premeditated. The maximum sentence is seven years imprisonment, with eligibility for early parole, prompting the "White Night riots" in the gay community. The Montreal Canadiens defeat the New York Rangers four games to one to win their fourth consecutive Stanley Cup. May 25 American Airlines Flight 191: In Chicago, a DC-10 crashes during takeoff at O'Hare International Airport, killing all 271 on board and 2 people on the ground in the deadliest aviation accident in U.S. history. John Spenkelink is executed in Florida, in the first use of the electric chair in America after the reintroduction of the death penalty in 1976. Etan Patz, 6 years old, is kidnapped in New York. He is often referred to as the "Boy on the Milk Carton" and the investigation later sprouts into one of the most famous child abduction cases of all time. This is a cold case until 2010 when it is re-opened. In April 2017, Pedro Hernandez is convicted of the murder and kidnapping and sentenced to life imprisonment. May 27 – Indianapolis 500: Rick Mears wins the race for the first time, and car owner Roger Penske for the second time. June[edit] Main article: June 1979 June 1 The Vizianagaram district is formed in Andhra Pradesh, India. The first black-led government of Rhodesia in 90 years takes power, in succession to Ian Smith and under his power-sharing deal, in the unrecognized republic of Zimbabwe Rhodesia. The Seattle SuperSonics win the NBA Championship against the Washington Bullets. June 2 Pope John Paul II arrives in his native Poland on his first official, nine-day stay, becoming the first Pope to visit a Communist country. This visit, known as nine days that changed the world, brings about the solidarity of the Polish people against Communism, ultimately leading to the rise of the Solidarity movement. Los Angeles' city council passes the city's first homosexual rights bill signed without fanfare by mayor Tom Bradley. June 3 Ixtoc I oil spill: A blowout at the Ixtoc I oil well in the southern Gulf of Mexico causes at least 600,000 tons (176,400,000 gallons) of oil to be spilled into the waters, the worst oil spill to date. Some estimate the spill to be 428 million gallons, making it the largest unintentional oil spill until it is surpassed by the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010. 1979 Italian general election: The Italian Communist Party loses a significant number of seats. June 4 Joe Clark becomes Canada's 16th and youngest Prime Minister. Flight Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings takes power in Ghana after a military coup in which General Fred Akuffo is overthrown. Following the "Muldergate" Information Scandal, John Vorster resigns as State President of South Africa.[10] June 7 – 1979 European Parliament election: The first direct elections to the European Parliament begin, allowing citizens from across all nine (at this time) member states of the European Union to elect 410 MEPs. It is also the first international election in history. June 12 – Bryan Allen flies the man-powered Gossamer Albatross across the English Channel. June 15 McDonald's introduces the Happy Meal in the United States in a nationwide advertising campaign after testing the product since February in franchises in the U.S. state of Missouri.[11] June 18 – Jimmy Carter and Leonid Brezhnev sign the SALT II agreement in Vienna. June 19 – Marais Viljoen becomes State President of South Africa.[10] June 20 – A Nicaraguan National Guard soldier kills ABC TV news correspondent Bill Stewart and his interpreter Juan Espinosa. Other members of the news crew capture the killing on tape. June 22 – The Muppet Movie is released. June 23 – New South Wales Premier Neville Wran officially opens the Eastern Suburbs Railway in Sydney. It operates as a shuttle between Central and Bondi Junction until full integration with the Illawarra Line in 1980. June 24 – The Permanent Peoples' Tribunal, an international opinion tribunal, is founded in Bologna at the initiative of Senator Lelio Basso. June 25 – NATO Supreme Allied Commander Alexander Haig escapes an assassination attempt in Belgium by the Baader-Meinhof terrorist organization. July[edit] Main article: July 1979 July 1 Sweden outlaws corporal punishment in the home. The Sony Walkman goes on sale for the first time in Japan. July 3 – U.S. President Jimmy Carter signs the first directive for secret aid to the opponents of the pro-Soviet regime in Afghanistan. July 5 – Queen Elizabeth II attends the millennium celebrations of the Isle of Man's Parliament, Tynwald.[12] July 8 – Los Angeles passes its gay and lesbian civil rights bill. July 9 – A car bomb destroys a Renault owned by Nazi hunters Serge and Beate Klarsfeld at their home in France. A note purportedly from ODESSA claims responsibility. July 11 – NASA's first orbiting space station, Skylab, begins falling back Earth as its orbit decays after more than six years. July 12 The Gilbert Islands become fully independent of the United Kingdom as Kiribati. A Disco Demolition Night publicity stunt goes awry at Comiskey Park, forcing the Chicago White Sox to forfeit their game against the Detroit Tigers. Carmine Galante, boss of the Bonanno crime family, is assassinated in Brooklyn. A fire at a hotel in Zaragoza, Spain, leaves 72 dead, the worst hotel fire in Europe in decades. July 15 – President Jimmy Carter addresses the nation in a televised speech talking about the "crisis of confidence in America today"; it would go on to be known as his "national malaise" speech. July 16 – Iraqi President Hasan al-Bakr resigns and Vice President Saddam al-Tikriti, more commonly referred to in the Western press as "Saddam Hussein", replaces him. July 17 – Nicaraguan president General Anastasio Somoza Debayle resigns and flees to Miami. July 21 The Sandinista National Liberation Front concludes a successful revolutionary campaign against the Somoza dynasty and assumes power in Nicaragua. Maria de Lourdes Pintasilgo becomes prime minister of Portugal. Maritza Sayalero of Venezuela wins the Miss Universe pageant; the stage collapses after contestants and news photographers rush to her throne. The disco music genre dominates and peaks on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, with the first six spots (beginning with Donna Summer's Bad Girls), and seven of the chart's top ten songs ending that week. July 22 – 1979 Ba'ath Party Purge: Iraqi president Saddam Hussein arranges the arrest and later execution of nearly seventy members of his ruling Ba'ath Party. July 28 – Morarji Desai resigns as India's prime minister and Charan Singh succeeds him. August[edit] Main article: August 1979 August 3 – Dictator Francisco Macías Nguema of Equatorial Guinea is overthrown in a bloody coup d'état led by Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo. August 4 – Opening game of the American Football Bundesliga played between Frankfurter Löwen and Düsseldorf Panther, first-ever league game of American football in Germany.[13] August 5 – The Polisario Front signs a peace treaty with Mauritania. Mauritania withdraws from the Western Sahara territory it had occupied, and cedes it to the SADR. August 6 - Bauhaus releases their debut single "Bela Lugosi's Dead", considered to be the first gothic rock release. August 8 – Two American commercial divers, Richard Walker and Victor Guiel, die of hypothermia after their diving bell becomes stranded at a depth of over 160 metres (520 ft) in the East Shetland Basin. The legal repercussions of the accident will lead to important safety changes in the diving industry.[14][15] August 9 – Raymond Washington, co-founder of the Crips, today one of the largest, most notorious gangs in the United States, is killed in a drive-by shooting in Los Angeles; the killers have not yet been identified. August 10 – Michael Jackson releases his breakthrough album Off the Wall. It sells 7 million copies in the United States alone, making it a 7× platinum album. August 11 The former Mauritanian province of Tiris al-Gharbiyya in Western Sahara is annexed by Morocco. The Machchu-2 dam in Morbi, India, collapses, killing between 1800 and 25000 people in one of the worst ever dam failures. August 14 – A freak storm during the Fastnet Race results in the deaths of 15 sailors. August 17 – The controversial religious satirical film Monty Python's Life of Brian premieres in the United States. August 27 – Lord Mountbatten of Burma and two others are killed in a bombing on his boat in the Republic of Ireland by the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA). Mountbatten was a British admiral, statesman and an uncle of The Duke of Edinburgh. On the same day, the Warrenpoint ambush occurs, killing 18 British soldiers. Doreen Knatchbull, Baroness Brabourne would die in a hospital the following day from injuries sustained in the bombing. August 29 – A national referendum is held in which Somali voters approve a new liberal constitution, promulgated by President Siad Barre to placate the United States. September[edit] Main article: September 1979 September 1 The U.S. Pioneer 11 becomes the first spacecraft to visit Saturn when it passes the planet at a distance of 21,000 kilometres (13,000 mi). Sri Lanka Army Women's Corps is formed. September 7 – The first cable sports channel, the Entertainment Sports Programming Network (better known as ESPN), is launched in the United States. September 9 – The long-running comic strip For Better or For Worse begins its run, in Canada, before becoming syndicated elsewhere in North America and the world. September 12 – Hurricane Frederic makes landfall at 10:00 p.m. on Alabama's Gulf Coast. September 13 – South Africa grants independence to the "homeland" of Venda (not recognised outside South Africa). September 16 East German balloon escape: Two families flee from East Germany by balloon. The Sugarhill Gang release Rapper's Delight in the United States, the first rap single to become a Top 40 hit on the Billboard Hot 100. September 20 – French paratroopers help David Dacko to overthrow Emperor Bokassa in the Central African Republic. September 22 – Vela incident: The "South Atlantic Flash" is observed near the Prince Edward Islands in the Indian Ocean, thought to be a nuclear weapons test conducted by South Africa and Israel. September 29 – The overthrown dictator Francisco Macías Nguema of Equatorial Guinea is convicted of genocide and executed by firing squad. September 30 – The Hong Kong MTR metro begins service with the opening of its Modified Initial System, the Kwun Tong Line. October[edit] Main article: October 1979 October 1 – Nigeria terminates military rule, and the Second Nigerian Republic is established. October 1–7 – Pope John Paul II visits the United States, starting in Boston. October 1 – The MTR, the rapid transit railway system in Hong Kong, opens. October 2 – Pope John Paul II arrives in New York City for his first papal tour where he addresses the U.N. General Assembly against all forms of concentration camps and torture. October 6 – Federal Reserve System changes from an interest rate target policy to a money supply target policy. October 7 – Pope John Paul II ends his first U.S. papal visit in Washington, D.C. with his first-ever visit to the White House. October 9 – Peter Brock wins the Bathurst 1000 by a record six laps, with a lap record on the last lap. October 12 Near Guam, Typhoon Tip reaches a record intensity of 870 millibars, the lowest pressure recorded at sea level. This makes Tip the most powerful tropical cyclone in known world history. Thorbjörn Fälldin returns as Prime Minister of Sweden, replacing Ola Ullsten who is named Foreign Minister of Sweden. The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, the first novel by Douglas Adams, is published in the United Kingdom October 14 – National March for gay rights takes place in Washington, D.C., involving tens of thousands of people. October 15 – Black Monday events, in which members of a political group sack a newspaper office, unfold in Malta. October 16 – A tsunami in Nice, France kills 23 people. October 19 – 13 U.S. Marines die in a fire at Camp Fuji, Japan as a result of Typhoon Tip.[16] October 20 – The first McDonald's in Singapore opens at Liat Towers in Orchard Road.[17][18] October 26 – Park Chung-hee, the President of South Korea, is assassinated by KCIA director Kim Jae-gyu. The eradication of the smallpox virus is announced by the World Health Organization,[19][20] making smallpox the first of only two human diseases that have been driven to extinction (rinderpest in 2011 being the other). October 27 – Saint Vincent and the Grenadines gains independence from the UK. October 31 – Western Airlines Flight 2605 crashes upon landing at Mexico City International Airport, killing 72 occupants plus one on the ground; 16 people on board survive. November[edit] Main article: November 1979 November 1 Military coup in Bolivia. Iran hostage crisis: Iranian Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini urges his people to demonstrate on November 4 and to expand attacks on United States and Israeli interests. November 2 French police shoot gangster Jacques Mesrine in Paris. Assata Shakur (née Joanne Chesimard), a former member of the Black Panther Party and Black Liberation Army, escapes from a New York prison to Cuba, where she remains under political asylum. November 3 – In Greensboro, North Carolina, five members of the Communist Workers Party are shot to death and seven are wounded by a group of Klansmen and neo-Nazis, during a "Death to the Klan" rally. November 4 – Iran hostage crisis begins: 500 Iranian radicals, mostly students, invade the U.S. Embassy in Tehran and take 90 hostages (53 of whom are American). They demand that the United States send the former Shah of Iran back to stand trial. November 5 All Saints' Massacre: The military junta in Bolivia initiates a violent crack-down on its opponents. The radio news program Morning Edition premieres on National Public Radio in the United States. November 6 – At Montevideo, Uruguay, the International Olympic Committee adopts a resolution, whereby Taiwan Olympic and sports teams will participate with the name Chinese Taipei in future Olympic Games and international sports tournaments and championships. November 7 – U.S. Senator Ted Kennedy announces that he will challenge President Jimmy Carter for the 1980 Democratic presidential nomination. November 9 The Carl Bridgewater murder trial ends in England with all four men found guilty. James Robinson, 45, and 25-year-old Vincent Hickey are sentenced to life imprisonment with a recommended 25-year minimum for murder. 18-year-old Michael Hickey is also found guilty of murder and sentenced to indefinite detention. Patrick Molloy, 53, is found guilty on a lesser charge of manslaughter and sentenced to 12 years in prison.[21] Nuclear false alarm: the NORAD computers and the Alternate National Military Command Center in Fort Ritchie, Maryland, detect an apparent massive Soviet nuclear strike. After reviewing the raw data from satellites and checking the early-warning radars, the alert is cancelled.[22] November 10 – 1979 Mississauga train derailment: A 106-car Canadian Pacific freight train carrying explosive and poisonous chemicals from Windsor, Ontario, Canada derails in Mississauga, just west of Toronto, causing a massive explosion and the largest peacetime evacuation in Canadian history and one of the largest in North American history. November 12 Iran hostage crisis: In response to the hostage situation in Tehran, U.S. President Jimmy Carter orders a halt to all oil imports into the United States from Iran. Süleyman Demirel, of the Justice Party (AP) forms the new government of Turkey (43rd government, a minority government). November 14 – Iran hostage crisis: U.S. President Jimmy Carter issues Executive Order 12170, freezing all Iranian assets in the United States and U.S. banks in response to the hostage crisis. November 15 – British art historian and former Surveyor of the Queen's Pictures Anthony Blunt's role as the "fourth man" of the 'Cambridge Five' double agents for the Soviet NKVD during World War II is revealed by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom;[23] she gives further details on November 21.[24] November 16 – Bucharest Metro Line One is opened, in Bucharest, Romania (from Timpuri Noi to Semanatoarea stations, 8.63 kilometres (5.36 mi)). November 17 – Iran hostage crisis: Iranian leader Ruhollah Khomeini orders the release of 13 female and African American hostages being held at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. November 20 – Grand Mosque seizure: A group of 200 Juhayman al-Otaybi militants occupy Mecca's Masjid al-Haram, the holiest place in Islam. They are driven out by Saudi military forces after bloody fighting that leaves 250 people dead and 600 wounded. November 21 – After false radio reports from the Ayatollah Khomeini that the Americans had occupied the Grand Mosque in Mecca, the United States Embassy in Islamabad, Pakistan is attacked by a mob and set afire, killing 4, and disturbing Pakistan–United States relations. November 23 – In Dublin, Ireland, Provisional Irish Republican Army member Thomas McMahon is sentenced to life in prison for the assassination of Lord Mountbatten of Burma. November 25 – The last cargo of phosphate was shipped from Banaba Island in Kiribati in the South Pacific ocean, bringing an end to the island's chief industry. November 28 – Air New Zealand Flight 901: an Air New Zealand DC-10 crashes into Mount Erebus in Antarctica on a sightseeing trip, killing all 257 people on board. November 30 – The Wall, a rock opera and concept album by Pink Floyd, is first released. December[edit] Main article: December 1979 December 3 The Who concert disaster: Eleven fans are killed during a crowd crush for unreserved seats before The Who rock concert at the Riverfront Coliseum in Cincinnati. The United States dollar exchange rate with the Deutsche Mark falls to 1.7079 DM, the all-time low so far; this record is not broken until November 5, 1987. Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini becomes the first Supreme Leader of Iran. December 4 – The Hastie fire in Kingston upon Hull, England, leads to the deaths of 3 boys and begins the hunt for Bruce George Peter Lee, the UK's most prolific killer. December 5 – Jack Lynch resigns as Taoiseach of the Republic of Ireland; he is succeeded by Charles Haughey. December 6 – The world premiere of Star Trek: The Motion Picture is held at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. December 12 The NATO Double-Track Decision: is the decision of NATO from December 12, 1979, to offer the Warsaw Pact a mutual limitation of medium-range ballistic missiles and intermediate-range ballistic missiles combined with the threat that in case of disagreement NATO would deploy more middle-range nuclear weapons in Western Europe, following the so-called "Euromissile Crisis". The 8.2 Mw Tumaco earthquake shakes Colombia and Ecuador with a maximum Mercalli intensity of IX (Violent), killing 300–600, and generating a large tsunami. Coup d'état of December Twelfth: South Korean Army Major General Chun Doo-hwan orders the arrest of Army Chief of Staff General Jeong Seung-hwa without authorization from President Choi Kyu-hah, alleging involvement in the assassination of ex-President Park Chung-hee. The unrecognised state of Zimbabwe Rhodesia returns to British control and resumes using the name Southern Rhodesia. December 13 – The government of Canada falls in a non-confidence motion. December 15 – The directorial debut of Hayao Miyazaki, The Castle of Cagliostro based on the manga series Lupin III is released in Japan. December 21 – A ceasefire for Rhodesia is signed at London. December 23 – The highest aerial tramway in Europe, the Klein Matterhorn, opens. December 24 The Soviet Union covertly launches its invasion of Afghanistan - 3 days later, PDPA general secretary Hafizullah Amin is executed in Operation Storm-333 and Babrak Karmal replaces him, beginning the war. The first European Ariane rocket is launched. December 26 – In Rhodesia, 96 Patriotic Front guerrillas enter the capital Salisbury to monitor a ceasefire that begins December 28. Date unknown[edit] The One-child policy is introduced in China – it contributes to Missing women of China. It was loosened in 2013. Hàny? P?ny?n is widely adopted as the official romanization system for Standard Chinese, leading to changes in Western spelling of Chinese toponyms. VisiCalc becomes the first commercial spreadsheet program. The first usenet experiments are conducted by Tom Truscott and Jim Ellis of Duke University. Worldwide per capita oil production reaches a historic peak. The remains of Tsar Nicholas II and some of the Romanovs are discovered and exhumed near Sverdlovsk (now Yekaterinburg). NBC introduces a new version of its famous peacock, used in conjunction with the 1975-style N, for the Fall season. China International Trust Investment Group (CITIC) founded.[25] Births[edit] Births January · February · March · April · May · June · July · August · September · October · November · December January[edit] Jagmeet Singh Kevin Kuske Cristela Alonzo Sarah Polley Siti Nurhaliza Aaliyah Svetlana Khorkina Wiley January 1 Brody Dalle, Australian singer[26] Vidya Balan, Indian actress Gisela, Spanish pop singer and voice actress January 2 Erica Hubbard, American actress Jagmeet Singh, Canadian politician, leader of the New Democratic Party January 3 Koit Toome, Estonian singer and musical actor Rie Tanaka, Japanese voice actress January 4 – Kevin Kuske, German Olympic bobsledder[27] January 6 Christina Chanée, Danish-Thai pop singer Bernice Liu, Hong Kong actress January 7 Bipasha Basu, Indian actress and model Christian Lindner, German politician January 8 Sarah Polley, Canadian actress, writer, director, producer and political activist Seol Ki-hyeon, South Korean footballer Stipe Pletikosa, Croatian football goalkeeper January 9 Tomiko Van, Japanese singer (Do As Infinity) Bipasha Basu, Indian actress and model January 11 Terence Morris, American basketball player[28] Siti Nurhaliza, Malaysian singer January 12 Marián Hossa, Slovak ice hockey player Lee Bo-young, South Korean actress and model Grzegorz Rasiak, Polish footballer January 15 Drew Brees, American football player Martin Petrov, Bulgarian footballer January 16 – Aaliyah, American R&B singer and actress (d. 2001) January 17 – Sharon Chan, Hong Kong actress January 18 Jay Chou, Taiwanese singer, song producer and actor Paulo Ferreira, Portuguese footballer Leo Varadkar, 14th Taoiseach of Ireland[29] January 19 – Svetlana Khorkina, Russian artistic gymnast January 20 Rob Bourdon, American drummer (Linkin Park) Asaka Kubo, Japanese gravure idol Will Young, English singer[30] January 21 Brian O'Driscoll, Irish rugby union player Inul Daratista, Indonesian dangdut singer Johann Hari, Scot-Swiss Journalist and author January 23 – Larry Hughes, American basketball player January 24 – Tatyana Ali, American actress January 25 – Christine Lakin, American actress January 26 ACM Neto, Brazilian lawyer and politician Sara Rue, American actress January 27 Daniel Vettori, New Zealand cricketer January 29 – B. J. Flores, American boxer January 31 – Jenny Wolf, German speed skater February[edit] Tawakkol Karman Josh Keaton Irina Slutskaya Jesse Spencer Mena Suvari Valentino Rossi Jennifer Love Hewitt Jordan Peele February 1 Julie Augustyniak, American footballer Mahek Chahal, Norwegian actress and model Valentín Elizalde, Mexican singer (d. 2006) Peter Fulton, New Zealand cricketer Rachelle Lefevre, Canadian actress Clodoaldo Silva, Brazilian paralympian swimmer February 2 David Paisley, Scottish actor Fani Chalkia, Greek athlete Mayer Hawthorne, American soul singer Christine Lampard, Northern Irish television presenter Shamita Shetty, Indian actress and interior designer Yuichi Tsuchiya, Japanese actor February 4 Andrei Arlovski, Belarusian mixed martial artist Jodi Shilling, American actress Tabitha Brown, American actress February 5 Paulo Gonçalves, Portuguese rally racing motorcycle rider (d. 2020) Katie Brambley, Canadian distance freestyle swimmer February 6 – David Dolní?ek, Czech ice hockey player February 7 Cerina Vincent, American actress and writer Micha? Karwan, Polish footballer Tawakkol Karman, Yemeni politician, Nobel Peace Prize laureate[31] February 8 Josh Keaton, American actor Martin Rowlands, Irish footballer Aleksey Mishin, Russian wrestler February 9 Zhang Ziyi, Chinese actress and model Irina Slutskaya, Russian figure skater February 11 – Brandy Norwood, African-American singer and actress February 12 Antonio Chatman, American football player Jesse Spencer, Australian actor February 13 Anders Behring Breivik, Norwegian far-right terrorist responsible for the 2011 Norway attacks Mena Suvari, American actress Rafael Márquez, Mexican footballer February 14 – Jocelyn Quivrin, French actor (d. 2009) February 15 – Gordon Shedden, Scottish race car driver February 16 Valentino Rossi, Italian seven-time MotoGP world champion Eric Mun, leader of Korean boy-band Shinhwa February 19 Mariana Ochoa, Mexican singer and actress Vitas, Ukrainian and Russian singer and actor February 20 – Song Chong-gug, South Korean footballer February 21 Maria Annus, Estonian actress Carly Colón, Puerto Rican professional wrestler Jennifer Love Hewitt, American actress and singer Jordan Peele, American actor, comedian, writer, director, and producer February 25 – László Bodnár, Hungarian footballer February 26 Corinne Bailey Rae, British singer-songwriter and guitarist Susana Diazayas, Mexican actress February 28 Michael Bisping, Cypriot mixed martial artist Sébastien Bourdais, French racing driver Sander van Doorn, Dutch DJ and electronic music producer March[edit] Ricardo Rosselló Melina Perez Oscar Isaac Adam Levine Lee Pace Norah Jones March 4 Ben Fouhy, New Zealand flatwater canoeist Geoff Huegill, Australian swimmer Jon Fratelli, Scottish singer (The Fratellis) March 5 Martin Axenrot, Swedish metal drummer Riki Lindhome, American actress and comedian Tang Gonghong, Chinese weightlifter March 6 – Érik Bédard, Canadian pitcher March 7 Stephanie Anne Mills, Canadian voice actress Ricardo Rosselló, Puerto Rican politician, Governor of Puerto Rico March 8 Jasmine You, Japanese musician (d. 2009) Tom Chaplin, British singer (Keane) March 9 Oscar Isaac, Guatemalan-American actor Melina Perez, American professional wrestler March 12 – Pete Doherty, British singer and guitarist (The Libertines, Babyshambles) March 13 – Johan Santana, Venezuelan baseball player March 14 Nicolas Anelka, French footballer Gao Ling, Chinese badminton player Chris Klein, American actor Michele Riondino, Italian actor March 16 – Adriana Fonseca, Mexican actress and dancer [32] March 17 – Samoa Joe, American professional wrestler March 18 Shola Ama, English singer Adam Levine, American singer (Maroon 5) March 19 Emil Dimitriev, Macedonian politician, Prime Minister Hedo Türko?lu, Turkish basketball player March 20 Daniel Cormier, American retired mixed martial artist Freema Agyeman, British actress Molly Jenson, American musician Bianca Lawson, American actress March 21 – Jimenez Lai, American architect March 23 Mark Buehrle, American baseball player Bryan Fletcher, American football player March 25 Lee Pace, American actor Traxamillion, American producer rapper Gorilla Zoe, American rapper March 28 - Shakib Khan, Bangladeshi film actor, producer, singer, film organiser and media personalities[33] March 29 – Estela Giménez, Spanish gymnast March 30 Daniel Arenas, Colombian-Mexican actor Norah Jones, American musician[34] Jose Pablo Cantillo, American actor April[edit] Lindy Booth Jesse Carmichael Heath Ledger Sophie Ellis-Bextor Claire Danes Jennifer Morrison Luke Evans Kourtney Kardashian Kate Hudson James McAvoy Jaime King April 2 Lindy Booth, Canadian actress Jesse Carmichael, American musician (Maroon 5) April 3 Grégoire, French singer-songwriter Živil? Bal?i?nait?, Lithuanian long-distance runner April 4 Heath Ledger, Australian actor and music video director (d. 2008)[35] Roberto Luongo, Canadian ice hockey goaltender Maksim Opalev, Russian canoeist April 8 Mohamed Kader, Togolese footballer Alexi Laiho, Finnish musician (Children of Bodom) (d. 2020) David Petruschin, American drag queen April 9 Sebastián Silva, Chilean director, actor, screenwriter, painter and musician Keshia Knight Pulliam, African-American actress Mario Matt, Austrian alpine skier April 10 Ryan Agoncillo, Filipino actor and TV personality Rachel Corrie, American activist and diarist (d. 2003)[36] Tsuyoshi Domoto, Japanese entertainer (KinKi Kids) Sophie Ellis-Bextor, British singer April 11 Sebastien Grainger, Canadian singer and musician Michel Riesen, Swiss ice hockey player Josh Server, American actor April 12 Claire Danes, American actress Jennifer Morrison, American actress April 13 – Baron Davis, American basketball player April 14 Pedro Andrade, Brazilian journalist and model Rebecca DiPietro, American model Pierre Roland, Indonesian actor April 15 – Luke Evans, Welsh actor and singer April 17 – Sung Si-kyung, South Korean singer April 18 Michael Bradley, American basketball player Anthony Davidson, English racing driver Yusuke Kamiji, Japanese actor Kourtney Kardashian, American reality television star April 19 Kate Hudson, American actress and co-founder of Fabletics Antoaneta Stefanova, Bulgarian chess player April 20 – Teoh Beng Hock, Malaysian journalist (d. 2009) April 21 Cindy Kurleto, Filipina-Austrian model and TV personality James McAvoy, Scottish actor Karin Rask, Estonian actress April 22 – Daniel Johns, Australian musician (Silverchair) April 23 Jaime King, American actress Yana Gupta, Indian actress of Czech origin April 24 Laurentia Tan, Singaporean Paralympic equestrienne Avey Tare, American musician Adam Andretti, American race car driver April 25 Andreas Küttel, Swiss ski jumper Andrea Osvárt, Hungarian actress April 27 – Travis Meeks, American musician (Days of the New) April 28 – Bahram Radan, Iranian actor April 29 Jo O'Meara, English singer (S Club 7) April 30 – Shelley Calene-Black, American voice actress May[edit] Lance Bass Jon Montgomery Rosario Dawson Mickey Madden Maggie Q Ashley Massaro Elisabeth Harnois Jesse Bradford May 1 Roman Lyashenko, Russian ice hockey player (d. 2003) Lars Berger, Norwegian biathlete and cross-country skier Mauro Bergamasco, Italian rugby union player May 2 – Jason Chimera, Canadian ice hockey player May 3 Danny Foster, English singer (Hear'Say) Ingrid Isotamm, Estonian actress May 4 Lance Bass, American singer (NSYNC) Wes Butters, English broadcaster May 5 – Vincent Kartheiser, American actor May 6 Mark Burrier, American cartoonist Kerry Ellis, English stage actress and singer Gerd Kanter, Estonian discus thrower Jon Montgomery, Canadian former skeleton racer and television personality; host of The Amazing Race Canada May 8 – Wendy Armoko, Indonesian singer, actor, presenter and comedian May 9 Pierre Bouvier, Canadian musician Rosario Dawson, American actress May 10 Marieke Vervoort, Belgian athlete (d. 2019) Lee Hyori, South Korean entertainer May 12 – Adrian Serioux, Canadian soccer player May 13 Mickey Madden, American musician (Maroon 5) Prince Carl Philip, Duke of Värmland May 14 – Urijah Faber, WEC Featherweight Champion May 15 – James Mackenzie, Scottish actor and TV presenter May 16 Brandon Lee, Filipino-American gay pornographic film actor Jessica Morris, American actress May 18 Mariusz Lewandowski, Polish footballer Michal Martikán, Slovak slalom canoeist Jens Bergensten ("Jeb"), Swedish game designer and co-founder of the game company Mojang May 19 Andrea Pirlo, Italian footballer Diego Forlán, Uruguayan football player May 20 – Andrew Scheer, Canadian politician May 21 – Sonja Vectomov, Czech-Finnish electronic musician and composer May 22 Maggie Q, American actress Nazanin Boniadi, Iranian-British-American actress May 23 – Rasual Butler, American basketball player (d. 2018) May 24 Frank Mir, American mixed martial artist Tracy McGrady, American basketball player May 25 – Jonny Wilkinson, English rugby union player[37] May 26 Ashley Massaro, American professional wrestler and model (d. 2019) Elisabeth Harnois, American actress May 27 – Michael Buonauro, American comic creator May 28 – Jesse Bradford, American actor May 29 – Brian Kendrick, American wrestler May 30 Mike Bishai, Canadian ice hockey player Clint Bowyer, American race car driver Rie Kugimiya, Japanese voice actress and singer June[edit] Morena Baccarin Anna Torv Robyn Chris Pratt Mindy Kaling Ryan Tedder Felicia Day Matisyahu June 1 TheFatRat, German musician and producer Markus "Notch" Persson, Swedish video game programmer, designer and creator of Minecraft Rhea Santos, Filipina journalist based in Canada June 2 Choirul Huda, Indonesian professional footballer and civil servant (d. 2017) Morena Baccarin, Brazilian actress June 5 François Sagat, French male gay porn film actor, model and director Pete Wentz, American musician, lyricist and bassist (Fall Out Boy) June 6 – Shanda Sharer, American murder victim (d. 1992) June 7 Anna Torv, Australian actress Kevin Hofland, Dutch footballer June 8 Pete Orr, Canadian baseball player Eddie Hearn, British promoter June 9 – Émilie Loit, French tennis player June 10 – Lee Brice, American country music singer-songwriter June 12 Robyn, Swedish singer-songwriter Amandine Bourgeois, French singer Diego Milito, Argentine football player Jodie Prenger, British actress June 13 Nila Håkedal, Norwegian beach volleyball player Ágnes Csomor, Hungarian actress June 14 Paradorn Srichaphan, Thai tennis player June 15 – Yulia Nestsiarenka, Belarusian athlete June 16 – Ari Hest, American singer-songwriter June 17 – Young Maylay, American actor, record producer and rapper June 18 Yumiko Kobayashi, Japanese voice actress Chris Neil, Canadian ice hockey player Pini Balili, Israeli-Turkish footballer and manager[38] Ivana Wong, Hong Kong singer-songwriter June 19 John Duddy, Irish boxer Kate Tsui, Hong Kong actress June 21 Chris Pratt, American actor Makasini Richter, Tongan rugby league player June 22 Sandra Klösel, German tennis player Jai Rodriguez, American actor and musician June 23 Marilyn Agliotti, Dutch field hockey player LaDainian Tomlinson, American football player June 24 Petra N?mcová, Czech model Joaquín de Orbegoso, Peruvian actor Craig Shergold, British cancer patient Mindy Kaling, American actress, comedian and author June 25 Busy Philipps, American film actress June 26 Ryan Tedder, American singer (OneRepublic), songwriter and producer Julia Benson, Canadian actress June 27 Cazwell, American rapper and songwriter Scott Taylor, American politician Fabrizio Miccoli, Italian professional footballer June 28 Felicia Day, American actress, writer, director, violinist and singer Randy McMichael, American football player June 29 Lee Hee-joon, South Korean actor Abz Love, English singer (5ive) Marleen Veldhuis, Dutch swimmer Yehuda Levi, Israeli actor and male model Liliana Castro, Ecuadorian-born Brazilian actress Artur Avila, Brazilian and French mathematician June 30 Rick Gonzalez, American actor Ed Kavalee, Australian comedian, actor, radio and television host Faisal Shahzad, Pakistani-American bomber Matisyahu, Jewish-American reggae vocalist, beatboxer and alternative rock musician Nelson Lucas, Seychellois sprinter Christopher Jacot, Canadian actor Andy Burrows, English songwriter and musician July[edit] Kevin Hart Scott Porter Laura Benanti Jayma Mays Mike Vogel Marielle Franco Rose Byrne Mageina Tovah Michelle Williams July 1 Danisa Phiri, Zimbabwean footballer Forrest Griffin, American mixed martial arts fighter Patrik Baboumian, German-Iranian strongman competitor, strength athlete and bodybuilder July 2 Diana Gurtskaya, Georgian singer Sam Hornish Jr., American race car driver Ayiesha Woods, American singer July 3 Sayuri Katayama, Japanese actress, singer and lyricist Ludivine Sagnier, French model and actress July 4 – Kevin Thoms, American actor and voice actor July 5 Oh Dae-hwan, South Korean actor Shane Filan, Irish singer (Westlife) Amélie Mauresmo, French tennis player Darine Hamze, Lebanese actress July 6 Mohsen Bengar, Iranian footballer Kevin Hart, American actor, comedian, writer and producer July 7 Pat Barry, American kickboxer and mixed martial artist Douglas Hondo, Zimbabwean cricketer Shebly Niavarani, Swedish actor Amanda Françozo, Brazilian television presenter and model July 8 – Ben Jelen, Scottish-born American former singer-songwriter July 9 Ella Koon, Hong Kong actress Gary Chaw, Malaysian Chinese singer July 10 Gong Yoo, South Korean actor Dimitri Soudas, Canadian political consultant July 11 Im Soo-jung, South Korean actress Marina Gatell, Spanish actress July 12 Nikos Barlos, Greek basketball player and coach Justin Rockefeller, American venture capitalist and political activist Sam Golzari, British actor July 13 Dejan ?irjakovi?, Serbian actor, screenwriter and musician Daniel Galera, Brazilian writer, translator and editor Holly Gauthier-Frankel, Canadian voice actress Ladyhawke, New Zealand singer-songwriter July 14 Sioen, Belgian singer and songwriter Axel Teichmann, German cross-country skier Scott Porter, American actor and singer[39] July 15 Laura Benanti, American actress and singer Travis Fimmel, Australian fashion model and actor Philipp Karner, American actor, writer and director July 16 Landy Wen, Taiwanese singer Jayma Mays, American actress and singer Kinya Kotani, Japanese singer Kim Rhode, American double trap and skeet shooter July 17 Mike Vogel, American actor Brendan James, American piano-based singer/songwriter July 18 Rick Baxter, American politician Jason Weaver, American actor and singer July 19 Malavika, Indian actress David Sakurai, Danish-Japanese actor, director, scriptwriter and martial artist Bruno Cabrerizo, Brazilian football player, model and actor July 20 Claudine Barretto, Filipino film actress, television actress, entrepreneur and product endorser Marcos Mion, Brazilian TV host, actor, voice actor and businessman Milan Nikoli?, Serbian accordionist Adam Rose, South African professional wrestler Amr Shabana, Egyptian squash player July 22 – Parvesh Cheena, American actor July 23 – Michelle Williams, American singer and actress July 24 Rose Byrne, Australian actress Lee Si-yeon, South Korean actress Stat Quo, American rapper July 25 Juan Pablo Di Pace, Argentinian actor and singer Allister Carter, English snooker player July 26 Johnson Beharry, British recipient of the Victoria Cross Tamyra Gray, American singer Derek Paravicini, British pianist Peter Sarno, Canadian ice hockey player Mageina Tovah, American actress July 27 Marielle Franco, Brazilian politician (d. 2018) Jorge Arce, Mexican boxer Shannon Moore, American professional wrestler July 30 Carlos Arroyo, Puerto Rican basketball player[40] Show Lo, Taiwanese singer Graeme McDowell, Northern Irish professional golfer Maya Nasser, Syrian journalist (d. 2012) July 31 – B. J. Novak, American actor, director and producer August[edit] Jason Momoa Evangeline Lilly Maria Haukaas Mittet JoAnna Garcia Peter Browngardt Aaron Paul August 1 Jason Momoa, American actor Junior Agogo, Ghanaian footballer (d. 2019) Honeysuckle Weeks, British actress August 3 Danso Gordon, Canadian actor Evangeline Lilly, Canadian actress and author of children's literature Maria Haukaas Mittet, Norwegian recording artist August 4 – Patryk Dominik Sztyber, Polish rock musician August 5 – David Healy, Northern Irish footballer August 7 – Miguel Llera, Spanish footballer August 10 JoAnna Garcia, American actress Ted Geoghegan, American screenwriter August 11 Drew Nelson, Canadian actor and voice actor Bubba Crosby, American baseball player August 12 Peter Browngardt, American cartoonist Cindy Klassen, Canadian speed skater August 13 – Taiz? Sugimura, Japanese politician August 15 Carl Edwards, American race car driver Peter Shukoff, American comedian, musician and personality August 16 Sarah Balabagan, Filipina prisoner and singer August 19 – Oumar Kondé, Swiss footballer August 20 – Jamie Cullum, English jazz pianist and singer August 22 Matt Walters, American football player Angelu de Leon, Filipina actress August 23 Mulan Jameela, Indonesian singer and politician Ritchie Neville, English singer (5ive) August 24 Elva Hsiao, Taiwanese singer Michael Redd, American basketball player August 25 – Andrew Hussie, American artist August 26 Jamal Lewis, American football player Cristian Mora, Ecuadorian footballer August 27 Giovanni Capitello, American filmmaker and actor Tian Liang, Chinese diver Aaron Paul, American actor August 28 Robert Hoyzer, German football referee Yuki Maeda, Japanese singer Shane Van Dyke, American actor August 29 – Justine Pasek, Miss Universe 2002 August 30 Leon Lopez, British actor, film director, singer-songwriter and occasional model Tavia Yeung, Hong Kong actress Niki Chow, Hong Kong actress August 31 Mickie James, American professional wrestler Simon Neil, Scottish musician (vocalist, guitarist, songwriter), Biffy Clyro Marmaduke Duke Yuvan Shankar Raja, Indian film composer September[edit] Júlio César Pink Dave Annable Amy Davidson Flo Rida Taavi Rõivas Bam Margera September 1 – Neg Dupree, British comedian September 2 Ron Ng, Hong Kong actor ?ukasz ?ygad?o, Polish volleyball player September 3 – Júlio César, Brazilian football goalkeeper September 4 – Maxim Afinogenov, Russian ice hockey player September 5 John Carew, Norwegian footballer Stacey Dales, Canadian basketball player and sportscaster September 6 – Ned Collette, Australian singer and musician September 7 – Nathan Hindmarsh, Australian rugby league player September 8 Pink, American singer and actress Ashraf Sinclair, English-Malaysian actor (d. 2020) September 10 – Mustis, Norwegian pianist September 11 Ariana Richards, American actress Eric Abidal, French footballer Cameron Richardson, American actress and model September 12 Michelle Dorrance, American tap dancer Jay McGraw, American author, son of TV psychologist Dr. Phil McGraw September 13 – Ivan Miljkovi?, Serbian volleyball player September 14 Stuart Fielden, English rugby league player Chris John, Indonesian former featherweight boxing champion Kamya Panjabi, Indian television actress September 15 Dave Annable, American actor Amy Davidson, American actress Edna Ngeringway Kiplagat, Kenyan long-distance runner Patrick Marleau, Canadian ice hockey player September 16 Fanny, French singer Flo Rida, African-American rapper Soo Ae, South Korean actress September 17 Akin Ayodele, American football player Chuck Comeau, Canadian drummer September 18 Junichi Inamoto, Japanese footballer Alison Lohman, American actress September 19 – Noémie Lenoir, French supermodel September 20 – David Long, New Zealand musician September 22 – MyAnna Buring, Swedish-English actress September 23 – Lote Tuqiri, Fijian-Australian rugby player September 24 Justin Bruening, American actor and model Erin Chambers, American actress Katja Kassin, German porn actress Julia Clarete, Filipina actress September 25 Rashad Evans, American retired mixed martial artist Michele Scarponi, Italian road bicycle racer (d. 2017) September 26 Naomichi Marufuji, Japanese professional wrestler Taavi Rõivas, Prime Minister of Estonia September 27 Zoltán Horváth, Hungarian basketball player (d. 2009) Shinji Ono, Japanese football player Nathan Foley, Australian performer September 28 Bam Margera, American skateboarder Anndi McAfee, American actress and voice actress September 29 Gaitana, Ukrainian singer and songwriter of Ukrainian and Congolese descent Artika Sari Devi, Putri Indonesia 2004 September 30 Mike Damus, American actor Vince Chong, Malaysian singer Juho Kuosmanen, Finnish film director and screenwriter[41][42] October[edit] Brianna Brown Rachael Leigh Cook Aaron Ashmore Shawn Ashmore Kristanna Loken Jawed Karim Chris O'Dowd Brandon Routh John Krasinski October 1 Rudi Johnson, American football player Senit, Italian singer of Eritrean descent Marko Stanojevic, English-born Italian rugby union player October 2 – Brianna Brown, American actress October 3 Matt Davis, American stand-up comedian Josh Klinghoffer, American musician (Red Hot Chili Peppers) John Hennigan, American professional wrestler October 4 Caitriona Balfe, Irish model and actress Brandon Barash, American actor Rachael Leigh Cook, American actress Adam Voges, Australian cricketer October 5 – Gao Yuanyuan, Chinese actress October 7 Aaron Ashmore, Canadian film and television actor Shawn Ashmore, Canadian film and television actor Simona Amânar, Romanian gymnast Tang Wei, Chinese actress October 8 – Kristanna Loken, American actress and model October 9 Csézy, Hungarian singer Vernon Fox, American football player Alex Greenwald, American singer-songwriter, producer and actor (Phantom Planet and JJAMZ) Todd Kelly, Australian race car driver Chris O'Dowd, Irish actor and comedian DJ Rashad, Chicago-based electronic musician, producer and DJ (d. 2014) Hendrik Odendaal, South African swimmer Brandon Routh, American actor Gonzalo Sorondo, Uruguayan footballer October 10 Wu Chun, Bruneian actor, model and singer Nicolás Massú, Chilean tennis player Mýa, American singer and actress October 11 Bae Doona, South Korean actress Gabe Saporta, Uruguayan singer (Cobra Starship) October 13 Ryan Malcolm, Canadian singer Mamadou Niang, Senegalese footballer October 14 – Stacy Keibler, American actress and model October 15 – Jaci Velasquez, American Christian singer October 16 – Erin Brown, American actress October 17 – Kimi Räikkönen, Finnish 2007 Formula 1 world champion[citation needed] October 18 – Ne-Yo, African-American singer and songwriter October 19 – Marc Elliott, British actor October 20 John Krasinski, American actor Paul O'Connell, Irish rugby union player October 23 Jorge Solís, Mexican professional boxer Prabhas, Indian actor October 25 – Sarah Thompson, American actress October 26 – Jonathan Chase, American actor October 28 Brett Dennen, American folk/pop singer and songwriter Jawed Karim, German and Bangladeshi-American software engineer, Internet entrepreneur and co-founder of YouTube Martin Škoula, Czech ice hockey player October 30 – Yukie Nakama, Japanese actress November[edit] Lamar Odom Cote de Pablo Mpule Kwelagobe Neeti Mohan Kelly Brook Joel Kinnaman November 1 Coco Crisp, American baseball player Atsuko Enomoto, Japanese voice actress Milan Dudi?, Serbian footballer November 2 Marián ?išovský, Slovak footballer (d. 2020) Erika Flores, American actress November 3 Pablo Aimar, Argentine footballer Tim McIlrath, American rock singer, songwriter (Rise Against) November 4 – Audrey Hollander, American porn actress November 5 Leonardo Nam, Australian actor Tarek Boudali, French actor Patrick Owomoyela, German Footballer of Nigerian descent November 6 Lamar Odom, African-American retired basketball player Myolie Wu, Hong Kong actress November 7 – Jon Peter Lewis, American singer and songwriter November 8 Aaron Hughes, Northern Irish footballer Dania Ramirez, Dominican actress Salvatore Cascio, Italian actor Dania Ramirez, Dominican-American actress November 9 Darren Trumeter, American actor and comedian[43] November 12 Matt Cappotelli, American professional wrestler (d. 2018) Cote de Pablo, Chilean actress Matt Stevic, Australian rules football umpire November 13 Henry Wolfe, American actor and musician Metta World Peace, American basketball player November 14 Mavie Hörbiger, German actress Olga Kurylenko, Ukrainian model and actress Mpule Kwelagobe, Miss Universe 1999 November 17 – Matthew Spring, English footballer November 18 – Neeti Mohan, Indian playback singer November 19 Barry Jenkins, American film director, producer, and screenwriter Larry Johnson, American football player Michelle Vieth, American born Mexican actress and model[44] November 20 – Ericson Alexander Molano, Colombian gospel singer November 21 – Kim Dong-wan, South Korean singer and actor November 22 Chris Doran, Irish singer Scott Robinson, English singer (5ive) November 23 Ivica Kosteli?, Croatian alpine skier Kelly Brook, English actress and model November 25 – Joel Kinnaman, Swedish-American actor November 27 Ricky Carmichael, American motorcycle and stock car racer Hilary Hahn, American violinist November 28 Dane Bowers, English singer-songwriter (Another Level) Jamie Korab, Canadian curler Hakeem Seriki, African-American rapper (Chamillionaire) Daniel Henney, American actor and model November 29 Simon Amstell, English comedian and writer Jayceon Taylor, American rapper (The Game) November 30 Diego Klattenhoff, Canadian actor Andrés Nocioni, Argentinian basketball player December[edit] Sabina Babayeva Eric Bauza Sara Bareilles Adam Brody December 2 Sabina Babayeva, Azerbaijani singer Yvonne Catterfeld, German singer, songwriter, actress, and television personality December 3 Daniel Bedingfield, English pop singer and songwriter Rock Cartwright, American football player Robby Mook, American former political campaign strategist and campaign manager Tiffany Haddish, American actress and comedian December 7 Eric Bauza, Canadian comedian and voice actor Sara Bareilles, American singer, songwriter and pianist Ayako Fujitani, Japanese actress Jennifer Carpenter, American actress December 8 – Ingrid Michaelson, American indie pop singer-songwriter December 10 – Keiko Nemoto, Japanese voice actress December 11 – Rider Strong, American actor, director, producer and screenwriter December 12 – Emin Agalarov, Azerbaijani-Russian singer-songwriter and businessman December 14 Chris Cheng, American sport shooter Michael Owen, English footballer December 15 Adam Brody, American actor Eric Young, Canadian wrestler December 16 Trevor Immelman, South African golfer Brodie Lee, American professional wrestler (d. 2020) Daniel Narcisse, French handball player Mihai Tr?istariu, Romanian singer and musician December 17 Jaimee Foxworth, American actress and model Erion Veliaj, Albanian politician, Mayor of Tirana December 19 Kevin Devine, American songwriter and musician Paola Rey, Colombian actress and model Tara Summers, English actress December 20 – Flávio, Angolan footballer December 21 – Rutina Wesley, American actress December 22 – Petra Majdi?, Slovene cross-country skier December 23 Jacqueline Bracamontes, Mexican actress and beauty contest winner (Nuestra Belleza México 2000) Kenny Miller, Scottish football player December 25 – Ferman Akgül, vocalist of Turkish nu-metal band maNga December 26 Chris Daughtry, American singer and guitarist Dimitry Vassiliev, Russian ski jumper December 28 James Blake, American tennis pro Diego Luna, Mexican actor André Holland, American actor Bree Williamson, Canadian actress Robert Edward Davis, German-American rapper Zach Hill, American drummer (Death Grips) December 30 Milana Terloeva, Chechen journalist and author Yelawolf, American rapper December 31 Bob Bryar, American drummer (My Chemical Romance) Elaine Cassidy, Irish actress Josh Hawley, American politician, U.S. Senator (R-MO) from 2019 Deaths[edit] January[edit] Nelson Rockefeller January 3 – Conrad Hilton, American hotelier (b. 1887) January 4 – Vincent Korda, Hungarian art director (b. 1897) January 5 Billy Bletcher, American actor (b. 1894) Charles Mingus, American musician (b. 1922) January 11 – Jack Soo, Japanese-born American actor (b. 1917) January 13 – Donny Hathaway, American musician (b. 1945) January 14 – Thomas DeSimone, American gangster (b. 1950) January 15 – Charles W. Morris, American philosopher and semiotician (b. 1901) January 16 – Ted Cassidy, American actor (b. 1932) January 22 – Ali Hassan Salameh, Palestinian Leader of Black September and mastermind of the 1972 Munich Massacre (b. 1940) January 26 – Nelson Rockefeller, 41st Vice President of the United States (b. 1908) February[edit] Sid Vicious February 2 Issa Pliyev, Soviet general (b. 1903) Sid Vicious, English musician (b. 1957) February 7 – Josef Mengele, German officer and physician (b. 1911) February 10 Edvard Kardelj, Slovene general, economist, and politician, 2nd Foreign Minister of Yugoslavia (b. 1910))[45] Karl von Eberstein, German politician (b. 1894) February 12 – Jean Renoir, French film director and actor (b. 1894) February 14 – Reginald Maudling, British politician (b. 1917) February 17 – William Gargan, American actor (b. 1905) February 20 – Nereo Rocco, Italian footballer and manager (b. 1912) February 25 – Henrich Focke, German aviation pioneer (b. 1890) March[edit] José María Velasco Ibarra March 1 Mustafa Barzani, Iraqi Kurdish politician (b. 1903) Dolores Costello, American actress (b. 1903) March 15 – Léonide Massine, Russian dancer and choreographer (b. 1896) March 18 – Marjorie Daw, American actress (b. 1902) March 19 – Richard Beckinsale, British actor (b. 1947) March 22 – Ben Lyon, American actor (b. 1901) March 24 – Yvonne Mitchell, English actress (b. 1915) March 26 – Jean Stafford, American writer (b. 1915) March 29 – Sultan Yahya Petra ibni Almarhum Sultan Ibrahim Petra, Sultan of Kelantan and 6th King of Malaysia (b. 1917) March 30 Airey Neave, British politician (assassinated) (b. 1916) José María Velasco Ibarra, Ecuadorian politician, 24th President of Ecuador (b. 1893) April[edit] Zulfikar Ali Bhutto April 4 Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, 9th Prime Minister of Pakistan and 4th President of Pakistan (executed) (b. 1928) Edgar Buchanan, American actor (b. 1903) April 10 – Nino Rota, Italian composer (b. 1911)[46] April 11 – Hassan Pakravan, Iranian diplomat (b. 1911) April 19 – Wilhelm Bittrich, German Waffen SS general (b. 1894) April 23 – Blair Peach, New Zealand-born, British teacher (b. 1946)[47] April 24 – John Carroll, American actor (b. 1906) April 27 – Phan Huy Quát, Vietnamese politician (b. 1908) May[edit] Mary Pickford May 1 – Morteza Motahhari, Iranian cleric & politician (b. 1919) May 2 – Giulio Natta, Italian chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1903) May 6 – Milton Ager, American songwriter (b. 1893) May 8 – Talcott Parsons, American sociologist (b. 1902) May 11 Joan Chandler, American actress (b. 1923) Barbara Hutton, American socialite (b. 1912) May 13 – Predrag ?aji?, Bosnian Serb and Yugoslav footballer (b. 1922) May 14 – Jean Rhys, Dominican novelist (b. 1890) May 16 – A. Philip Randolph, African-American civil rights activist (b. 1889) May 27 – Ahmed Ould Bouceif, Mauritanian military officer, 2nd Prime Minister of Mauritania (b. 1934) May 29 – Mary Pickford, Canadian-American actress and producer (b. 1892) June[edit] John Wayne June 1 Ján Kadár, Czechoslovakian film director (b. 1918) Jack Mulhall, American actor (b. 1887) June 5 – Heinz Erhardt, German comedian, musician, entertainer, actor and poet (b. 1909) June 6 – Jack Haley, American actor (b. 1898) June 8 - Reinhard Gehlen, German general, 20 July Plotter (b. 1902) June 11 John Wayne, American Academy Award-winning actor and film director (b. 1907) Loren Murchison, American Olympic athlete (b. 1898) June 13 – Darla Hood, American actress (b. 1931) June 22 – Louis Chiron, Monacan Grand Prix driver (b. 1899) June 25 – Dave Fleischer, American animator (b. 1894) June 26 – Akwasi Afrifa, Ghanaian soldier and politician, Head of state (1969–1970) (b. 1936) June 29 – Lowell George, American singer, songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, and record producer (b. 1945) July[edit] Shin'ichir? Tomonaga Gustavo Diaz Ordaz July 2 – Carlyle Smith Beals, Canadian astronomer (b. 1899) July 3 – Louis Durey, French composer (b. 1888) July 4 – Theodora Kroeber, American writer and anthropologist (b. 1897) July 6 Antonio María Barbieri, Uruguay Roman Catholic cardinal (b. 1892) Van McCoy, American musician noted for his 1975 hit "The Hustle" (b. 1940) July 8 Elizabeth Ryan, American 30 Grand Slam (tennis) Tennis Champion (b. 1892) Shin'ichir? Tomonaga, Japanese physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1906) Michael Wilding, English actor (b. 1912) Robert Burns Woodward, American chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1917) July 10 – Arthur Fiedler, American conductor (Boston Pops) (b. 1894) July 12 – Minnie Riperton, American rhythm and blues singer (Lovin' You) (b. 1947) July 13 – Corinne Griffith, American actress and author (b. 1894) July 15 Gustavo Díaz Ordaz, Mexican politician, 49th President of Mexico, 1964-1970 (b. 1911)[48] Juana de Ibarbourou, Uruguayan poet (b. 1892) July 16 – Alfred Deller, English countertenor (b. 1912) July 17 – Edward Akufo-Addo, Ghanese politician and lawyer, 5th President of Ghana (b. 1906) July 20 – Sir Herbert Butterfield, English philosopher and historian (b. 1900) July 22 – Sándor Kocsis, Hungarian footballer (b. 1929) July 28 – George Seaton, American screenwriter and director (b. 1911) July 29 – Herbert Marcuse, German-American philosopher, sociologist and political theorist (b. 1898) August[edit] John Diefenbaker Mika Waltari Jean Seberg August 2 Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre, Peruvian politician, founder and leader of APRA party (b. 1895) Thurman Munson, American baseball player (b. 1947) August 3 – Bertil Ohlin, Swedish economist and Liberal politician, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences (b. 1899) August 6 – Feodor Lynen, German biochemist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (b. 1911) August 9 – Walter O'Malley, American baseball executive (b. 1903) August 10 Dick Foran, American actor (b. 1910) Mohammad Nur Ahmad Etemadi, Afghan politician, 9th Prime Minister of Afghanistan (b. 1921) August 12 – Ernst Chain, German-born British biochemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1906) August 16 – John Diefenbaker, 13th Prime Minister of Canada (b. 1895) August 17 – Vivian Vance, American actress and singer (b. 1909) August 19 – Saad Jumaa, Prime Minister of Jordan (b. 1916) August 20 – Christian Dotremont, Belgian painter and writer (b. 1922) August 21 – Stuart Heisler, American film and television director (b. 1896) August 22 – James T. Farrell, American novelist (b. 1904) August 24 Ahmad Daouk, Lebanese politician, 12th Prime Minister of Lebanon (b. 1892) Hanna Reitsch, German aviator (b. 1912) August 25 – Stan Kenton, American jazz pianist (b. 1911) August 26 Alvin Karpis, American criminal (b. 1907) Mika Waltari, Finnish author (b. 1908)[49] August 27 – Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma, British Viceroy of India (assassinated) (b. 1900) August 30 (body found on September 8) – Jean Seberg, American actress (b. 1938) August 31 – Sally Rand, American dancer (b. 1904) September[edit] Agostinho Neto Gracie Fields September 1 – Doris Kenyon, American actress (b. 1897) September 2 – Felix Aylmer, British actor (b. 1889) September 5 – Alberto di Jorio, Italian Roman Catholic cardinal (b. 1884) September 6 – Guy Bolton, British playwright (b. 1884) September 9 – Norrie Paramor, British music producer (b. 1914) September 10 – Agostinho Neto, Angolan poet and politician, 1st President of Angola (b. 1922) September 16 Giò Ponti, Italian architect, industrial designer, furniture designer and artist (b. 1891) Rob Slotemaker, Indonesian-born, Dutch Formula 1 racing car driver (b. 1929) September 20 Sultan Ismail Nasiruddin Shah, Sultan of Terengganu and 4th King of Malaysia (b. 1907) Ludvík Svoboda, 8th President of Czechoslovakia (b. 1895) September 22 Abul A'la Maududi, Pakistani journalist and philosopher (b. 1903) Otto Robert Frisch, Austrian-born British physicist (b. 1904) September 24 – Carl Laemmle Jr., American film studio executive (b. 1908) September 25 – Yury Kovalyov, Soviet footballer (b. 1934) September 26 John Cromwell, American film director and actor (b. 1887) Arthur Hunnicutt, American actor (b. 1910) September 27 Gracie Fields, British actress (b. 1898) Jimmy McCulloch, Scottish guitarist (Paul McCartney & Wings) (b. 1953) September 29 Francisco Macías Nguema, 1st President of Equatorial Guinea (executed) (b. 1924) Ivan Wyschnegradsky, Russian composer (b. 1893) October[edit] Park Chung-hee October 1 – Dorothy Arzner, American film director (b. 1897) October 6 – Elizabeth Bishop, American poet (b. 1911) October 15 – Jacob L. Devers, American army general (b. 1887) October 16 – Johan Borgen, Norwegian author (b. 1903) October 18 – Virgilio Piñera, Cuban author, playwright and poet (b. 1912) October 22 – Nadia Boulanger, French composer and composition teacher (b. 1887) October 23 – Antonio Caggiano, Argentine cardinal (b. 1889) October 25 Maphevu Dlamini, 2nd Prime Minister of Swaziland (b. 1922) Gerald Templer, British field marshal (b. 1898) October 26 – Park Chung-hee, Korean politician, 3rd President of the Republic of Korea (South Korea) (assassinated) (b. 1917) October 27 – Father Charles Coughlin, Canadian-born American priest and controversial conservative radio show commentator (b. 1891) October 30 Barnes Wallis, British aeronautical engineer (b. 1887) Rachele Mussolini, Italian, wife of Benito Mussolini (b. 1890) November[edit] Merle Oberon November 1 Albert Préjean, French actor (b. 1894) Mamie Eisenhower, 34th First Lady of the United States (b. 1896) November 2 – Jacques Mesrine, French criminal; known as the "French Robin Hood" (b. 1936) November 5 Al Capp, American cartoonist (b. 1909) Amedeo Nazzari, Italian actor (b. 1907) November 8 – Yvonne de Gaulle, French political wife of former President of France Charles de Gaulle (b. 1900) November 11 – Dimitri Tiomkin, Russian film composer (b. 1894) November 17 – Immanuel Velikovsky, Russian author and psychiatrist (b. 1895) November 23 Merle Oberon, British actress (b. 1911) Judee Sill, American singer and songwriter (b. 1944) November 26 – Marcel L'Herbier, French movie-maker (b. 1888) November 30 – Zeppo Marx, American actor and comedian (b. 1901) December[edit] Hafizullah Amin Richard Rodgers December 3 – Dhyan Chand, Indian hockey player (b. 1905) December 5 – Sonia Delaunay, Russian-born French artist (b. 1885) December 7 – Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin, British-born American astronomer and astrophysicist (b. 1900) December 9 – Fulton J. Sheen, American Roman Catholic bishop and venerable (b. 1895) December 10 – Ann Dvorak, American actress (b. 1911)[50] December 11 – James J. Gibson, American psychologist and academic (b. 1904)[51] December 13 – Jon Hall, American actor (b. 1915) December 15 – Ethel Lackie, American Olympic swimmer (b. 1907) December 16 – Vagif Mustafazadeh, Azerbaijani jazz musician (b. 1940) December 21 – Ermindo Onega, Argentine footballer (b. 1940) December 22 – Darryl F. Zanuck, American film producer (b. 1902)[52] December 23 Peggy Guggenheim, American art collector (b. 1898) Ernest B. Schoedsack, American film producer and director (b. 1893) December 24 – Rudi Dutschke, German radical student leader (b. 1940) December 25 Joan Blondell, American actress (b. 1906) Lee Bowman, American actor (b. 1914) December 26 – Helmut Hasse, German mathematician (b. 1898) December 27 – Hafizullah Amin, 2nd General Secretary of the People's Democratic Party and Chairman of the Revolutionary Council (b. 1929) December 28 – Rafael Filiberto Bonnelly, 43rd President of the Dominican Republic (b. 1904) December 30 – Richard Rodgers, American composer (b. 1902) Nobel Prizes[edit] Physics – Sheldon Lee Glashow, Abdus Salam, Steven Weinberg Chemistry – Herbert C. Brown, Georg Wittig Medicine – Allan MacLeod Cormack, Godfrey Hounsfield Literature – Odysseas Elytis Peace – Mother Teresa Economics – Theodore Schultz, W. Arthur Lewis Media[edit] The Doctor Who story City of Death is set in 1979, its year of broadcast. The events of the 2011 science fiction film Super 8 take place during 1979. 1979 Revolution: Black Friday, an interactive drama video game released in 2016, based on the events of the Iranian Revolution in 1979. References[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to 1979. ^ United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. Regional Centre for Culture and Book Development in Asia (1979). Newsletter. p. 3. ^ American Academy of Arts and Sciences (July 1994). Fundamentalisms Observed. University of Chicago Press. p. 403. ISBN 978-0-226-50878-8. ^ J. Robert Moskin, American Statecraft: The Story of the U.S. Foreign Service (Thomas Dunne Books, 2013), p. 594. ^ Daley, Jason. "Snow Falls in the Sahara for the First Time Since 1979". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved April 18, 2020. ^ "Total Eclipse of the Sun: 1979 February 26". HM Nautical Almanac Office. April 11, 2011. Archived from the original on March 28, 2006. Retrieved March 18, 2013. ^ ""Tämmöinen öljyhomma merellä on laitoksen sisäinen asia, eikä siitä tiedoteta" – Itämeren pahin öljyturma pysyi pimennossa lähes kuukauden". Yle. November 27, 2020. Retrieved November 4, 2021. ^ "1979: Three die in Golborne mine blast". On This Day. BBC. Retrieved March 18, 2013. ^ "1979: Early election as Callaghan defeated". On This Day. BBC. Retrieved March 18, 2013. ^ "1979: Thatcher wins Tory landslide". Election 2005. BBC News. April 5, 2005. Retrieved March 18, 2013. ^ a b Archontology.org: A Guide for Study of Historical Offices: South Africa: Heads of State: 1961–1994. Accessed 14 April 2017. ^ Wausau (WI) Daily Herald, June 15, 1979, p. 9; Helena (MT) Independent-Record, June 19, 1979, p. 31; Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel, June 19, 1979, p. 3; Seymour (IN) Tribune, June 20, 1979, p. 15 ^ "1979: Queen oversees Manx millennium". On This Day. BBC. Archived from the original on March 7, 2008. Retrieved January 27, 2008. ^ Annette R. Hofmann. Turnen and Sport. Waxmann Verlag. p. 224. ISBN 978-3-8309-6381-3. ^ Limbrick, Jim (2001). North Sea Divers – a Requiem. Hertford: Authors OnLine. pp. 160–162. ISBN 0-7552-0036-5. ^ Smart, Michael (2011). Into the Lion's Mouth: The Story of the Wildrake Diving Accident. Medford, Oregon: Lion's Mouth Publishing. ISBN 978-0-615-52838-0. ^ "US Marine Corps". Archived from the original on February 25, 2008. Retrieved March 3, 2016. ^ "U.S. fast food hits Singapore". The Telegraph. October 8, 1980. Retrieved November 13, 2014. ^ "Singapore's Orchard Road: You Can Shop Until You Drop". Daily News. April 11, 1990. Retrieved November 13, 2014. ^ "Smallpox Has Been Eradicated", Associated Press Report in Santa Cruz (CA) Sentinel, October 26, 1979, p. 1 ^ "Smallpox: Mankind Says Goodbye To A Ruthless Killer", by David Zinman, Pittsburgh Press, October 11, 1979, p. B-1 ^ "1979: Paperboy's killers convicted". On This Day. BBC. Retrieved March 18, 2013. ^ "False Alarms on the Nuclear Front". Pbs.org. May 3, 2001. Retrieved April 29, 2014. ^ Tendler, Stewart; Bradley, Ian (November 16, 1979). "Professor Blunt named as spy". The Times (60476). London. p. 1. ^ Mr. Anthony Blunt. Hansard HC Deb (November 21, 1979) 974/402-520. ^ "Rong Yiren | Chinese official". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved December 4, 2020. ^ Diehl, Matt (2007). My So-Called Punk: Green Day, Fall Out Boy, the Distillers, Bad Religion—How Neo-Punk Stage-Dived into the Mainstream. New York: St. Martin's Griffin. p. 92. ^ "Kevin Kuske". IBSF. Retrieved October 27, 2020. ^ "Terence Morris Stats". Basketball-Reference.com. ^ Philip Ryan; Niall O'Connor (August 30, 2018). Leo: A Very Modern Taoiseach. Biteback Publishing. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-78590-372-4. ^ McPhee, Erica (2005). Will Young: The Biography. London, UK: Michael O'Mara Books. p. 14. ISBN 1-84317-175-9. ^ "Tawakkul Karm?n". Britannica Presents 100 Women Trailblazers. March 25, 2020. Retrieved July 26, 2021. ^ "Adriana Fonseca participará en Tiempo final". El Universal (in Spanish). March 15, 2009. Retrieved May 24, 2010. ^ Culture, Desk (March 27, 2018). "Happy birthday, Shakib Khan". Daily Sun. Retrieved January 14, 2020. ^ Dilworth, Thomas J. (July 6, 2007). "What's Next for Norah Jones?". ABC News. Archived from the original on June 28, 2011. Retrieved November 19, 2009. ^ Savage, Michael (January 23, 2008). "Heath Ledger: The Times Obituary". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on July 26, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008. ^ "A Time to Remember Solidarity and the Best in Humanity: Commemorating Rachel Corrie (10 April 1979 – 16 March 2003)". Al-Haq | Defending Human rights in Palestine since 1979. Retrieved February 19, 2021. ^ Chris Schoeman (2007). Legends of the Ball: Rugby's Greatest Players Chosen by Willie John McBride, Frik Du Preez, David Compese. CJS Books. p. 106. ISBN 978-0-620-36962-6. ^ "Pini Balili - FIFA 08 - Player Stats". fifaindex.com. ^ Scott Porter [@ScottPorter] (July 14, 2016). "Just wanted to say I'm overwhelmed with all the birthday wishes. Much love to all my virtual friends out there! Thank you!" (Tweet). Retrieved July 14, 2016 – via Twitter. ^ "Carlos Arroyo Stats". Basketball-Reference.com. ^ Torino Film Lab: Juho Kuosmanen ^ YLE: Ohjaaja Juho Kuosmanen kertaa riemukasta iltaa Cannesin elokuvajuhlilla – "Ehkä meidät kutsuttiin, koska olimme kaupungissa", voittaja arveli ennen kuin totuus paljastui (in Finnish) ^ "Darren Trumeter". IMDb. ^ "Michelle Vieth", Las Noticias Mexico.com (in Spanish), retrieved August 24, 2019 ^ Bernard A. Cook (2001). Europe Since 1945: An Encyclopedia. Taylor & Francis. p. 710. ISBN 978-0-8153-4058-4. ^ Gino Moliterno (September 11, 2002). Encyclopedia of Contemporary Italian Culture. Routledge. p. 733. ISBN 978-1-134-75876-0. ^ Dummett, Michael (1980). The Death of Blair Peach: the Supplementary Report of the Unofficial Committee of Enquiry. London: National Council for Civil Liberties. ISBN 978-0-9011-0891-3. ^ "Gustavo Díaz Ordaz" (in Spanish). Busca Biografias. Retrieved May 30, 2019. ^ Hejkalová, Markéta (2008) [2007 (Czech)]. Mika Waltari: The Finn. Translated by Turner, Gerald. Helsinki: WSOY. p. 171. ISBN 978-951-0-34335-7. ^ "Ann Dvorak Dies; Screen Actress, 67". The New York Times. December 20, 1979. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 22, 2020. ^ Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc. (May 1, 2008). Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc. p. 761. ISBN 978-1-59339-492-9. ^ Arnold, Gary (December 24, 1979). "Motion Picture Producer Darryl F. Zanuck Is Dead at 77". Retrieved August 31, 2017 – via WashingtonPost.com. Further reading[edit] Caryl, Christian, Strange Rebels: 1979 and the Birth of the 21st Century (2013), 1979 as worldwide turning point; excerpt and text search Facts on File. Facts on File Yearbook: 1979 (1980) weekly factual report on events worldwide. Hodson, H.V. Annual Register of World Events 1979 (1980), in-depth coverage of major countries Paxton, John, ed. Statesman's Yearbook 1978–1979 (1980), statistical details on all countries Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=1979&oldid=1055924365" Categories: 1979 Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Use mdy dates from August 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Articles using Mw magnitude scale Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 AC with 0 elements Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Languages Acèh Afrikaans Alemannisch ???? Anarâškielâ ?????? ??????? Aragonés ?????????????? Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'? ???? Az?rbaycanca ?????? Basa Bali ????? Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? Bikol Central ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl ?????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kab?y? ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kiswahili ???? Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ???????? ????? ???? ??? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Limburgs Lingála Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ????????? ???? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? ??????? ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ???? ????? ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? ?????? Papiamentu Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Q?r?mtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sardu Seeltersk Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?l?nski Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Tetun ??? ?????? Türkçe Türkmençe ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Võro Walon ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki Zeêuws Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 18 November 2021, at 17:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1979 1979 - Wikipedia 1979 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article is about the year 1979. For other uses, see 1979 (disambiguation). 1979 January February March April May June July August September October November December Calendar year Millennium: 2nd millennium Centuries: 19th century 20th century 21st century Decades: 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s Years: 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1979 by topic Subject Animation Anime Archaeology Architecture Art Aviation Awards Comics Film Home video Literature Poetry Meteorology Music Country Heavy metal Hip hop Jazz Rail transport Radio Science Spaceflight Sports Football Television American British Scottish Italian Video gaming By country Australia Bangladesh Belgium Bulgaria Brazil Canada People's Republic of China France Germany Greece India Ireland Iran Israel Japan Kuwait Luxembourg Malaysia Mexico New Zealand Norway Pakistan Philippines Singapore South Africa South Korea Sweden Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States Lists of leaders Sovereign states Sovereign state leaders Territorial governors Religious leaders Law Birth and death categories Births Deaths Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments Disestablishments Works category Works Introductions v t e 1979 in various calendars Gregorian calendar 1979 MCMLXXIX Ab urbe condita 2732 Armenian calendar 1428 ?? ???? Assyrian calendar 6729 Bahá'í calendar 135–136 Balinese saka calendar 1900–1901 Bengali calendar 1386 Berber calendar 2929 British Regnal year 27 Eliz. 2 – 28 Eliz. 2 Buddhist calendar 2523 Burmese calendar 1341 Byzantine calendar 7487–7488 Chinese calendar ??? (Earth Horse) 4675 or 4615     — to — ??? (Earth Goat) 4676 or 4616 Coptic calendar 1695–1696 Discordian calendar 3145 Ethiopian calendar 1971–1972 Hebrew calendar 5739–5740 Hindu calendars  - Vikram Samvat 2035–2036  - Shaka Samvat 1900–1901  - Kali Yuga 5079–5080 Holocene calendar 11979 Igbo calendar 979–980 Iranian calendar 1357–1358 Islamic calendar 1399–1400 Japanese calendar Sh?wa 54 (?????) Javanese calendar 1910–1912 Juche calendar 68 Julian calendar Gregorian minus 13 days Korean calendar 4312 Minguo calendar ROC 68 ??68? Nanakshahi calendar 511 Thai solar calendar 2522 Tibetan calendar ???? (male Earth-Horse) 2105 or 1724 or 952     — to — ???? (female Earth-Goat) 2106 or 1725 or 953 Unix time 283996800 – 315532799 Wikimedia Commons has media related to 1979. 1979 (MCMLXXIX) was a common year starting on Monday of the Gregorian calendar, the 1979th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 979th year of the 2nd millennium, the 79th year of the 20th century, and the 10th and last year of the 1970s decade. Calendar year Contents 1 Events 1.1 January 1.2 February 1.3 March 1.4 April 1.5 May 1.6 June 1.7 July 1.8 August 1.9 September 1.10 October 1.11 November 1.12 December 1.13 Date unknown 2 Births 2.1 January 2.2 February 2.3 March 2.4 April 2.5 May 2.6 June 2.7 July 2.8 August 2.9 September 2.10 October 2.11 November 2.12 December 3 Deaths 3.1 January 3.2 February 3.3 March 3.4 April 3.5 May 3.6 June 3.7 July 3.8 August 3.9 September 3.10 October 3.11 November 3.12 December 4 Nobel Prizes 5 Media 6 References 7 Further reading Events[edit] January[edit] Main article: January 1979 January 1 United Nations Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim heralds the start of the International Year of the Child.[1] Many musicians donate to the Music for UNICEF Concert fund, among them ABBA, who write the song Chiquitita to commemorate the event. The United States and the People's Republic of China establish full diplomatic relations. Following a deal agreed during 1978, French carmaker Peugeot completes a takeover of American manufacturer Chrysler's European operations, which are based in Britain's former Rootes Group factories, as well as the former Simca factories in France. January 7 – Cambodian–Vietnamese War: The People's Army of Vietnam and Vietnamese-backed Cambodian insurgents announce the fall of Phnom Penh, Cambodia, and the collapse of the Pol Pot regime. Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge retreat west to an area along the Thai border, ending large-scale fighting. January 8 – Whiddy Island Disaster: The French tanker Betelgeuse explodes at the Gulf Oil terminal at Bantry, Ireland; 50 are killed. January 9 – The Music for UNICEF Concert is held at the United Nations General Assembly to raise money for UNICEF and promote the Year of the Child. It is broadcast the following day in the United States and around the world. Hosted by the Bee Gees, other performers include Donna Summer, ABBA, Rod Stewart and Earth, Wind & Fire. A soundtrack album is later released. January 16 – Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi flees Iran with his family, relocating to Egypt after a year of turmoil. January 19 – Former U.S. Attorney General John N. Mitchell is released on parole after 19 months at a federal prison in Alabama. January 21 – The Pittsburgh Steelers stake their claim as the NFL team of the 1970s by beating the Dallas Cowboys 35–31 at Miami's Orange Bowl in Super Bowl XIII. January 22 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Mutukula: The Tanzanian military captures the Ugandan border town of Mutukula after a short battle. January 25 – Pope John Paul II arrives in Mexico City for his first visit to Mexico, mainly for 1979's Latin American Episcopal Conference (CELAM) or Conference of Puebla. January 29 – Cleveland Elementary School shooting (San Diego): Brenda Ann Spencer opens fire at a school in San Diego, California, killing two faculty members and wounding eight students and a police officer. Her justification for the action, "I don't like Mondays", inspires the Boomtown Rats to make a song of the same name. February[edit] Main article: February 1979 February 1 Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returns to Tehran, Iran after nearly 15 years of exile.[2] Former Sex Pistols bassist Sid Vicious is released on bail after undergoing a 55-day forcible detoxification programme at Rikers Island prison. He suffers a heroin overdose and dies around midnight. February 3 – Ayatollah Khomeini creates the Council of the Islamic Revolution. February 7 Iranian Revolution: Supporters of Ayatollah Khomeini take over the Iranian law enforcement, courts and government administration; the final session of the Iranian National Consultative Assembly is held. Pluto moves inside Neptune's orbit for the first time since either was known to science. Nazi criminal Josef Mengele suffers a stroke and drowns while swimming in Bertioga, Brazil. His remains are found in 1985. February 10–11 – Iranian Revolution: The Iranian army withdraws to its barracks leaving power in the hands of Ayatollah Khomeini, ending the Pahlavi dynasty. February 11 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Simba Hills: The Tanzanian military began its assault on the Simba Hills near the town of Kakuuto. February 12 – Prime Minister Hissène Habré starts the Battle of N'Djamena in an attempt to overthrow Chad's President Félix Malloum. February 13 The intense February 13, 1979 windstorm strikes western Washington and sinks a 1.3 kilometres (0.81 mi) long section of the Hood Canal Bridge. The Guardian Angels are formed in New York City as an unarmed organization of young crime fighters. February 14 – In Kabul, Muslim extremists kidnap the American ambassador to Afghanistan, Adolph Dubs, who is killed during a gunfight between his kidnappers and police.[3] February 15 – A suspected gas explosion in a Warsaw bank kills 49. February 17 – The People's Republic of China invades northern Vietnam, launching the Sino-Vietnamese War. February 18 The Sahara Desert experiences snow for 30 minutes.[4] The 1979 Daytona 500 is televised on CBS, the first ever full airing of a 500-mile race on US television, Richard Petty wins after Cale Yarborough and Donnie Allison battle for first place on the final lap and crash out, leading to a fist fight. This race brought NASCAR to a wider audience.[citation needed] The Khomeini government in Iran cuts diplomatic relations with Israel. February 21 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Gayaza Hills: A Tanzanian brigade successfully dislodged Ugandan forces from the Gayaza Hills. The battle is hard-fought, and the Tanzanians suffer their largest number of casualties in a single engagement of the war. February 22 – Saint Lucia becomes independent from the United Kingdom. February 26 A total solar eclipse, the last visible from the continental United States until 2017, arcs over northwestern conterminous USA and central Canada ending in Greenland. A partial solar eclipse is visible over almost all of North America and Central America including the eastern half of Alaska and the western half of the UK.[5] The Superliner railcar enters revenue service with Amtrak. February 27 The annual Mardi Gras celebration in New Orleans is cancelled due to a strike called by the New Orleans Police Department. The Soviet oil tanker Antonio Gramsci suffers a minor shipwreck in shallow waters shortly after leaving shore in Ventspils, resulting in a 5,000 ton oil spill, the largest that has ever occurred on the Baltic Sea.[6] March[edit] Main article: March 1979 March 1 Scottish devolution referendum: Scotland votes in favour for a Scottish Assembly, which is not implemented due to failing a condition that at least 40% of the electorate must support the proposal; in a Welsh devolution referendum, Wales votes against devolution. Philips publicly demonstrate a prototype of an optical digital audio disc at a press conference in Eindhoven, Netherlands. March 2 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Tororo: Ugandan rebels attack and capture the town of Tororo. March 4 The U.S. Voyager 1 spaceprobe photos reveal Jupiter's rings. Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Tororo: The Ugandan military retakes Tororo from rebels. March 5 – Voyager 1 makes its closest approach to Jupiter at 277,000 kilometres (172,000 mi). March 7 – The largest Magnetar (Soft gamma repeater) event is recorded. March 8 – Philips demonstrates the compact disc publicly for the first time. Thousands of women participate in the International Women's Day Protests in Tehran, 1979 against the introduction of mandatory veiling during the Iranian revolution. March 10 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Lukaya: The Ugandan military, a Libyan expeditionary force and allied Palestine Liberation Organisation militants begin a counter-offensive against Tanzanian troops in south-central Uganda. The Ugandan-led alliance retakes Lukaya after a short clash with the Tanzanian military. March 11 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Lukaya: The Tanzanian military counter-attacks at Lukaya, completely defeating the Ugandan-led alliance. This defeat permanently cripples the Ugandan military. March 13 – Maurice Bishop leads a successful coup in Grenada. His government will be crushed by American intervention in 1983. March 14 – In China, a Hawker Siddeley Trident crashes into a factory near Beijing, killing 31 people on the ground and injuring 200. March 16 – End of major hostilities in the Sino-Vietnamese War. March 17 – The Penmanshiel Tunnel in the UK collapses, killing two workers. March 19 - C-SPAN, an American television channel focusing on government and public affairs, is launched. March 18 – Ten miners die in a methane gas explosion at Golborne Colliery near Wigan, Greater Manchester, England.[7] March 22 – The NHL votes to approve its merger with the WHA, effective in the fall. March 25 – The first fully functional Space Shuttle orbiter, Columbia, is delivered to the Kennedy Space Center, to be prepared for its first launch. March 26 In a ceremony at the White House, President Anwar Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel sign an Egypt–Israel Peace Treaty. Michigan State University, led by Earvin "Magic" Johnson, defeats Larry Bird-led Indiana State 75–64 in the NCAA tournament championship game at Salt Lake City. March 28 In Britain, James Callaghan's minority Labour government loses a motion of confidence by one vote, forcing a general election which is to be held on 3 May.[8] America's most serious nuclear power plant accident occurs, at Three Mile Island, Pennsylvania. March 29 – Sultan Yahya Petra of Kelantan, the 6th Yang di-Pertuan Agong (Head of State) of Malaysia, dies in office. He is replaced by Sultan Ahmad Shah of Pahang. March 30 – Airey Neave, Conservative M.P. in the British House of Commons, is killed, presumably by an Irish National Liberation Army bomb in the car park for the Houses of Parliament. March 31 The last British soldier (belonging to the Royal Navy) leaves the Maltese Islands, after 179 years of presence. Malta declares its Freedom Day (Jum il-Helsien). Milk and Honey win the Eurovision Song Contest 1979 for Israel, with the song Hallelujah. April[edit] Main article: April 1979 April 1 Iran's government becomes an Islamic Republic by a 98% vote, overthrowing the Shah officially. Nickelodeon launches from QUBE's Pinwheel experiment and begins airing on various Warner Cable systems beginning in Buffalo, New York, expanding its audience reach. Dale Earnhardt Sr wins his first career NASCAR race at the 1979 Southeastern 500 at Bristol Motor Speedway. He would go on to win 76 races and 7 championships during his career. April 1–18 – Police lock Andreas Mihavecz in a holding cell in Bregenz, Austria and forget about him, leaving him there without food or drink. April 2 – Sverdlovsk anthrax leak: A Soviet biowarfare laboratory at Sverdlovsk accidentally releases airborne anthrax spores, killing 66 plus an unknown amount of livestock. It is a violation of the Biological Weapons Convention of 1972. April 2 - In Japan, the channel of TV Asahi premieres Doraemon. April 4 – Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto is executed by hanging for the murder of a political opponent. April 5 - Ex-premier Pol Jar flees out of Cambodia April 6 – Student protests break out in Nepal. April 7 – In Japan, Yoshiyuki Tomino directs Mobile Suit Gundam, the first series of the metaseries of the same name. April 10 – A tornado hits Wichita Falls, Texas, killing 42 people (the most notable of 26 tornadoes that day). April 11 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Fall of Kampala: Tanzanian troops take Kampala, the capital of Uganda; Idi Amin flees. April 13 – The La Soufrière volcano erupts in St. Vincent and the Grenadines. April 15 – 1979 Montenegro earthquake: A major earthquake Mw6.9 strikes Montenegro (then part of Yugoslavia) and parts of Albania, causing extensive damage to coastal areas and taking 136 lives; the old town of Budva is devastated. April 17 – Schoolchildren in the Central African Republic are arrested (and around 100 killed) for protesting against compulsory school uniforms. An African judicial commission later determines that Emperor Jean-Bédel Bokassa "almost certainly" took part in the massacre. April 22 – The Albert Einstein Memorial is unveiled at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C. April 23 – Fighting breaks out in London between the Anti-Nazi League and the Metropolitan Police's Special Patrol Group; protester Blair Peach receives fatal injuries during the incident, now officially attributed to the SPG. May[edit] Main article: May 1979 May 1 – Greenland is granted limited autonomy from Denmark, with its own Parliament sitting in Nuuk. May 3 – The 1979 United Kingdom general election for the House of Commons takes place, giving the Conservatives a majority, and electing Margaret Thatcher as the nation's first woman prime minister, ending the rule of James Callaghan's Labour government.[9] May 8 – Ten shoppers die in a fire at the Woolworths department store in Manchester city centre in England. May 9 The Salvadoran Civil War begins. A Unabomber bomb injures Northwestern University graduate student John Harris. May 10 – The Federated States of Micronesia becomes self-governing. May 15 – Uganda–Tanzania War: Battle of Lira: Tanzania and its Uganda National Liberation Front allies capture Lira, Uganda, from the forces of Ugandan dictator Idi Amin. May 21 Dan White is convicted of manslaughter, rather than murder, for the assassination of San Francisco Mayor George Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk, after using what would become known as the "Twinkie defense" and persuading a jury that the crime was not premeditated. The maximum sentence is seven years imprisonment, with eligibility for early parole, prompting the "White Night riots" in the gay community. The Montreal Canadiens defeat the New York Rangers four games to one to win their fourth consecutive Stanley Cup. May 25 American Airlines Flight 191: In Chicago, a DC-10 crashes during takeoff at O'Hare International Airport, killing all 271 on board and 2 people on the ground in the deadliest aviation accident in U.S. history. John Spenkelink is executed in Florida, in the first use of the electric chair in America after the reintroduction of the death penalty in 1976. Etan Patz, 6 years old, is kidnapped in New York. He is often referred to as the "Boy on the Milk Carton" and the investigation later sprouts into one of the most famous child abduction cases of all time. This is a cold case until 2010 when it is re-opened. In April 2017, Pedro Hernandez is convicted of the murder and kidnapping and sentenced to life imprisonment. May 27 – Indianapolis 500: Rick Mears wins the race for the first time, and car owner Roger Penske for the second time. June[edit] Main article: June 1979 June 1 The Vizianagaram district is formed in Andhra Pradesh, India. The first black-led government of Rhodesia in 90 years takes power, in succession to Ian Smith and under his power-sharing deal, in the unrecognized republic of Zimbabwe Rhodesia. The Seattle SuperSonics win the NBA Championship against the Washington Bullets. June 2 Pope John Paul II arrives in his native Poland on his first official, nine-day stay, becoming the first Pope to visit a Communist country. This visit, known as nine days that changed the world, brings about the solidarity of the Polish people against Communism, ultimately leading to the rise of the Solidarity movement. Los Angeles' city council passes the city's first homosexual rights bill signed without fanfare by mayor Tom Bradley. June 3 Ixtoc I oil spill: A blowout at the Ixtoc I oil well in the southern Gulf of Mexico causes at least 600,000 tons (176,400,000 gallons) of oil to be spilled into the waters, the worst oil spill to date. Some estimate the spill to be 428 million gallons, making it the largest unintentional oil spill until it is surpassed by the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010. 1979 Italian general election: The Italian Communist Party loses a significant number of seats. June 4 Joe Clark becomes Canada's 16th and youngest Prime Minister. Flight Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings takes power in Ghana after a military coup in which General Fred Akuffo is overthrown. Following the "Muldergate" Information Scandal, John Vorster resigns as State President of South Africa.[10] June 7 – 1979 European Parliament election: The first direct elections to the European Parliament begin, allowing citizens from across all nine (at this time) member states of the European Union to elect 410 MEPs. It is also the first international election in history. June 12 – Bryan Allen flies the man-powered Gossamer Albatross across the English Channel. June 15 McDonald's introduces the Happy Meal in the United States in a nationwide advertising campaign after testing the product since February in franchises in the U.S. state of Missouri.[11] June 18 – Jimmy Carter and Leonid Brezhnev sign the SALT II agreement in Vienna. June 19 – Marais Viljoen becomes State President of South Africa.[10] June 20 – A Nicaraguan National Guard soldier kills ABC TV news correspondent Bill Stewart and his interpreter Juan Espinosa. Other members of the news crew capture the killing on tape. June 22 – The Muppet Movie is released. June 23 – New South Wales Premier Neville Wran officially opens the Eastern Suburbs Railway in Sydney. It operates as a shuttle between Central and Bondi Junction until full integration with the Illawarra Line in 1980. June 24 – The Permanent Peoples' Tribunal, an international opinion tribunal, is founded in Bologna at the initiative of Senator Lelio Basso. June 25 – NATO Supreme Allied Commander Alexander Haig escapes an assassination attempt in Belgium by the Baader-Meinhof terrorist organization. July[edit] Main article: July 1979 July 1 Sweden outlaws corporal punishment in the home. The Sony Walkman goes on sale for the first time in Japan. July 3 – U.S. President Jimmy Carter signs the first directive for secret aid to the opponents of the pro-Soviet regime in Afghanistan. July 5 – Queen Elizabeth II attends the millennium celebrations of the Isle of Man's Parliament, Tynwald.[12] July 8 – Los Angeles passes its gay and lesbian civil rights bill. July 9 – A car bomb destroys a Renault owned by Nazi hunters Serge and Beate Klarsfeld at their home in France. A note purportedly from ODESSA claims responsibility. July 11 – NASA's first orbiting space station, Skylab, begins falling back Earth as its orbit decays after more than six years. July 12 The Gilbert Islands become fully independent of the United Kingdom as Kiribati. A Disco Demolition Night publicity stunt goes awry at Comiskey Park, forcing the Chicago White Sox to forfeit their game against the Detroit Tigers. Carmine Galante, boss of the Bonanno crime family, is assassinated in Brooklyn. A fire at a hotel in Zaragoza, Spain, leaves 72 dead, the worst hotel fire in Europe in decades. July 15 – President Jimmy Carter addresses the nation in a televised speech talking about the "crisis of confidence in America today"; it would go on to be known as his "national malaise" speech. July 16 – Iraqi President Hasan al-Bakr resigns and Vice President Saddam al-Tikriti, more commonly referred to in the Western press as "Saddam Hussein", replaces him. July 17 – Nicaraguan president General Anastasio Somoza Debayle resigns and flees to Miami. July 21 The Sandinista National Liberation Front concludes a successful revolutionary campaign against the Somoza dynasty and assumes power in Nicaragua. Maria de Lourdes Pintasilgo becomes prime minister of Portugal. Maritza Sayalero of Venezuela wins the Miss Universe pageant; the stage collapses after contestants and news photographers rush to her throne. The disco music genre dominates and peaks on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, with the first six spots (beginning with Donna Summer's Bad Girls), and seven of the chart's top ten songs ending that week. July 22 – 1979 Ba'ath Party Purge: Iraqi president Saddam Hussein arranges the arrest and later execution of nearly seventy members of his ruling Ba'ath Party. July 28 – Morarji Desai resigns as India's prime minister and Charan Singh succeeds him. August[edit] Main article: August 1979 August 3 – Dictator Francisco Macías Nguema of Equatorial Guinea is overthrown in a bloody coup d'état led by Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo. August 4 – Opening game of the American Football Bundesliga played between Frankfurter Löwen and Düsseldorf Panther, first-ever league game of American football in Germany.[13] August 5 – The Polisario Front signs a peace treaty with Mauritania. Mauritania withdraws from the Western Sahara territory it had occupied, and cedes it to the SADR. August 6 - Bauhaus releases their debut single "Bela Lugosi's Dead", considered to be the first gothic rock release. August 8 – Two American commercial divers, Richard Walker and Victor Guiel, die of hypothermia after their diving bell becomes stranded at a depth of over 160 metres (520 ft) in the East Shetland Basin. The legal repercussions of the accident will lead to important safety changes in the diving industry.[14][15] August 9 – Raymond Washington, co-founder of the Crips, today one of the largest, most notorious gangs in the United States, is killed in a drive-by shooting in Los Angeles; the killers have not yet been identified. August 10 – Michael Jackson releases his breakthrough album Off the Wall. It sells 7 million copies in the United States alone, making it a 7× platinum album. August 11 The former Mauritanian province of Tiris al-Gharbiyya in Western Sahara is annexed by Morocco. The Machchu-2 dam in Morbi, India, collapses, killing between 1800 and 25000 people in one of the worst ever dam failures. August 14 – A freak storm during the Fastnet Race results in the deaths of 15 sailors. August 17 – The controversial religious satirical film Monty Python's Life of Brian premieres in the United States. August 27 – Lord Mountbatten of Burma and two others are killed in a bombing on his boat in the Republic of Ireland by the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA). Mountbatten was a British admiral, statesman and an uncle of The Duke of Edinburgh. On the same day, the Warrenpoint ambush occurs, killing 18 British soldiers. Doreen Knatchbull, Baroness Brabourne would die in a hospital the following day from injuries sustained in the bombing. August 29 – A national referendum is held in which Somali voters approve a new liberal constitution, promulgated by President Siad Barre to placate the United States. September[edit] Main article: September 1979 September 1 The U.S. Pioneer 11 becomes the first spacecraft to visit Saturn when it passes the planet at a distance of 21,000 kilometres (13,000 mi). Sri Lanka Army Women's Corps is formed. September 7 – The first cable sports channel, the Entertainment Sports Programming Network (better known as ESPN), is launched in the United States. September 9 – The long-running comic strip For Better or For Worse begins its run, in Canada, before becoming syndicated elsewhere in North America and the world. September 12 – Hurricane Frederic makes landfall at 10:00 p.m. on Alabama's Gulf Coast. September 13 – South Africa grants independence to the "homeland" of Venda (not recognised outside South Africa). September 16 East German balloon escape: Two families flee from East Germany by balloon. The Sugarhill Gang release Rapper's Delight in the United States, the first rap single to become a Top 40 hit on the Billboard Hot 100. September 20 – French paratroopers help David Dacko to overthrow Emperor Bokassa in the Central African Republic. September 22 – Vela incident: The "South Atlantic Flash" is observed near the Prince Edward Islands in the Indian Ocean, thought to be a nuclear weapons test conducted by South Africa and Israel. September 29 – The overthrown dictator Francisco Macías Nguema of Equatorial Guinea is convicted of genocide and executed by firing squad. September 30 – The Hong Kong MTR metro begins service with the opening of its Modified Initial System, the Kwun Tong Line. October[edit] Main article: October 1979 October 1 – Nigeria terminates military rule, and the Second Nigerian Republic is established. October 1–7 – Pope John Paul II visits the United States, starting in Boston. October 1 – The MTR, the rapid transit railway system in Hong Kong, opens. October 2 – Pope John Paul II arrives in New York City for his first papal tour where he addresses the U.N. General Assembly against all forms of concentration camps and torture. October 6 – Federal Reserve System changes from an interest rate target policy to a money supply target policy. October 7 – Pope John Paul II ends his first U.S. papal visit in Washington, D.C. with his first-ever visit to the White House. October 9 – Peter Brock wins the Bathurst 1000 by a record six laps, with a lap record on the last lap. October 12 Near Guam, Typhoon Tip reaches a record intensity of 870 millibars, the lowest pressure recorded at sea level. This makes Tip the most powerful tropical cyclone in known world history. Thorbjörn Fälldin returns as Prime Minister of Sweden, replacing Ola Ullsten who is named Foreign Minister of Sweden. The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, the first novel by Douglas Adams, is published in the United Kingdom October 14 – National March for gay rights takes place in Washington, D.C., involving tens of thousands of people. October 15 – Black Monday events, in which members of a political group sack a newspaper office, unfold in Malta. October 16 – A tsunami in Nice, France kills 23 people. October 19 – 13 U.S. Marines die in a fire at Camp Fuji, Japan as a result of Typhoon Tip.[16] October 20 – The first McDonald's in Singapore opens at Liat Towers in Orchard Road.[17][18] October 26 – Park Chung-hee, the President of South Korea, is assassinated by KCIA director Kim Jae-gyu. The eradication of the smallpox virus is announced by the World Health Organization,[19][20] making smallpox the first of only two human diseases that have been driven to extinction (rinderpest in 2011 being the other). October 27 – Saint Vincent and the Grenadines gains independence from the UK. October 31 – Western Airlines Flight 2605 crashes upon landing at Mexico City International Airport, killing 72 occupants plus one on the ground; 16 people on board survive. November[edit] Main article: November 1979 November 1 Military coup in Bolivia. Iran hostage crisis: Iranian Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini urges his people to demonstrate on November 4 and to expand attacks on United States and Israeli interests. November 2 French police shoot gangster Jacques Mesrine in Paris. Assata Shakur (née Joanne Chesimard), a former member of the Black Panther Party and Black Liberation Army, escapes from a New York prison to Cuba, where she remains under political asylum. November 3 – In Greensboro, North Carolina, five members of the Communist Workers Party are shot to death and seven are wounded by a group of Klansmen and neo-Nazis, during a "Death to the Klan" rally. November 4 – Iran hostage crisis begins: 500 Iranian radicals, mostly students, invade the U.S. Embassy in Tehran and take 90 hostages (53 of whom are American). They demand that the United States send the former Shah of Iran back to stand trial. November 5 All Saints' Massacre: The military junta in Bolivia initiates a violent crack-down on its opponents. The radio news program Morning Edition premieres on National Public Radio in the United States. November 6 – At Montevideo, Uruguay, the International Olympic Committee adopts a resolution, whereby Taiwan Olympic and sports teams will participate with the name Chinese Taipei in future Olympic Games and international sports tournaments and championships. November 7 – U.S. Senator Ted Kennedy announces that he will challenge President Jimmy Carter for the 1980 Democratic presidential nomination. November 9 The Carl Bridgewater murder trial ends in England with all four men found guilty. James Robinson, 45, and 25-year-old Vincent Hickey are sentenced to life imprisonment with a recommended 25-year minimum for murder. 18-year-old Michael Hickey is also found guilty of murder and sentenced to indefinite detention. Patrick Molloy, 53, is found guilty on a lesser charge of manslaughter and sentenced to 12 years in prison.[21] Nuclear false alarm: the NORAD computers and the Alternate National Military Command Center in Fort Ritchie, Maryland, detect an apparent massive Soviet nuclear strike. After reviewing the raw data from satellites and checking the early-warning radars, the alert is cancelled.[22] November 10 – 1979 Mississauga train derailment: A 106-car Canadian Pacific freight train carrying explosive and poisonous chemicals from Windsor, Ontario, Canada derails in Mississauga, just west of Toronto, causing a massive explosion and the largest peacetime evacuation in Canadian history and one of the largest in North American history. November 12 Iran hostage crisis: In response to the hostage situation in Tehran, U.S. President Jimmy Carter orders a halt to all oil imports into the United States from Iran. Süleyman Demirel, of the Justice Party (AP) forms the new government of Turkey (43rd government, a minority government). November 14 – Iran hostage crisis: U.S. President Jimmy Carter issues Executive Order 12170, freezing all Iranian assets in the United States and U.S. banks in response to the hostage crisis. November 15 – British art historian and former Surveyor of the Queen's Pictures Anthony Blunt's role as the "fourth man" of the 'Cambridge Five' double agents for the Soviet NKVD during World War II is revealed by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom;[23] she gives further details on November 21.[24] November 16 – Bucharest Metro Line One is opened, in Bucharest, Romania (from Timpuri Noi to Semanatoarea stations, 8.63 kilometres (5.36 mi)). November 17 – Iran hostage crisis: Iranian leader Ruhollah Khomeini orders the release of 13 female and African American hostages being held at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. November 20 – Grand Mosque seizure: A group of 200 Juhayman al-Otaybi militants occupy Mecca's Masjid al-Haram, the holiest place in Islam. They are driven out by Saudi military forces after bloody fighting that leaves 250 people dead and 600 wounded. November 21 – After false radio reports from the Ayatollah Khomeini that the Americans had occupied the Grand Mosque in Mecca, the United States Embassy in Islamabad, Pakistan is attacked by a mob and set afire, killing 4, and disturbing Pakistan–United States relations. November 23 – In Dublin, Ireland, Provisional Irish Republican Army member Thomas McMahon is sentenced to life in prison for the assassination of Lord Mountbatten of Burma. November 25 – The last cargo of phosphate was shipped from Banaba Island in Kiribati in the South Pacific ocean, bringing an end to the island's chief industry. November 28 – Air New Zealand Flight 901: an Air New Zealand DC-10 crashes into Mount Erebus in Antarctica on a sightseeing trip, killing all 257 people on board. November 30 – The Wall, a rock opera and concept album by Pink Floyd, is first released. December[edit] Main article: December 1979 December 3 The Who concert disaster: Eleven fans are killed during a crowd crush for unreserved seats before The Who rock concert at the Riverfront Coliseum in Cincinnati. The United States dollar exchange rate with the Deutsche Mark falls to 1.7079 DM, the all-time low so far; this record is not broken until November 5, 1987. Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini becomes the first Supreme Leader of Iran. December 4 – The Hastie fire in Kingston upon Hull, England, leads to the deaths of 3 boys and begins the hunt for Bruce George Peter Lee, the UK's most prolific killer. December 5 – Jack Lynch resigns as Taoiseach of the Republic of Ireland; he is succeeded by Charles Haughey. December 6 – The world premiere of Star Trek: The Motion Picture is held at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. December 12 The NATO Double-Track Decision: is the decision of NATO from December 12, 1979, to offer the Warsaw Pact a mutual limitation of medium-range ballistic missiles and intermediate-range ballistic missiles combined with the threat that in case of disagreement NATO would deploy more middle-range nuclear weapons in Western Europe, following the so-called "Euromissile Crisis". The 8.2 Mw Tumaco earthquake shakes Colombia and Ecuador with a maximum Mercalli intensity of IX (Violent), killing 300–600, and generating a large tsunami. Coup d'état of December Twelfth: South Korean Army Major General Chun Doo-hwan orders the arrest of Army Chief of Staff General Jeong Seung-hwa without authorization from President Choi Kyu-hah, alleging involvement in the assassination of ex-President Park Chung-hee. The unrecognised state of Zimbabwe Rhodesia returns to British control and resumes using the name Southern Rhodesia. December 13 – The government of Canada falls in a non-confidence motion. December 15 – The directorial debut of Hayao Miyazaki, The Castle of Cagliostro based on the manga series Lupin III is released in Japan. December 21 – A ceasefire for Rhodesia is signed at London. December 23 – The highest aerial tramway in Europe, the Klein Matterhorn, opens. December 24 The Soviet Union covertly launches its invasion of Afghanistan - 3 days later, PDPA general secretary Hafizullah Amin is executed in Operation Storm-333 and Babrak Karmal replaces him, beginning the war. The first European Ariane rocket is launched. December 26 – In Rhodesia, 96 Patriotic Front guerrillas enter the capital Salisbury to monitor a ceasefire that begins December 28. Date unknown[edit] The One-child policy is introduced in China – it contributes to Missing women of China. It was loosened in 2013. Hàny? P?ny?n is widely adopted as the official romanization system for Standard Chinese, leading to changes in Western spelling of Chinese toponyms. VisiCalc becomes the first commercial spreadsheet program. The first usenet experiments are conducted by Tom Truscott and Jim Ellis of Duke University. Worldwide per capita oil production reaches a historic peak. The remains of Tsar Nicholas II and some of the Romanovs are discovered and exhumed near Sverdlovsk (now Yekaterinburg). NBC introduces a new version of its famous peacock, used in conjunction with the 1975-style N, for the Fall season. China International Trust Investment Group (CITIC) founded.[25] Births[edit] Births January · February · March · April · May · June · July · August · September · October · November · December January[edit] Jagmeet Singh Kevin Kuske Cristela Alonzo Sarah Polley Siti Nurhaliza Aaliyah Svetlana Khorkina Wiley January 1 Brody Dalle, Australian singer[26] Vidya Balan, Indian actress Gisela, Spanish pop singer and voice actress January 2 Erica Hubbard, American actress Jagmeet Singh, Canadian politician, leader of the New Democratic Party January 3 Koit Toome, Estonian singer and musical actor Rie Tanaka, Japanese voice actress January 4 – Kevin Kuske, German Olympic bobsledder[27] January 6 Christina Chanée, Danish-Thai pop singer Bernice Liu, Hong Kong actress January 7 Bipasha Basu, Indian actress and model Christian Lindner, German politician January 8 Sarah Polley, Canadian actress, writer, director, producer and political activist Seol Ki-hyeon, South Korean footballer Stipe Pletikosa, Croatian football goalkeeper January 9 Tomiko Van, Japanese singer (Do As Infinity) Bipasha Basu, Indian actress and model January 11 Terence Morris, American basketball player[28] Siti Nurhaliza, Malaysian singer January 12 Marián Hossa, Slovak ice hockey player Lee Bo-young, South Korean actress and model Grzegorz Rasiak, Polish footballer January 15 Drew Brees, American football player Martin Petrov, Bulgarian footballer January 16 – Aaliyah, American R&B singer and actress (d. 2001) January 17 – Sharon Chan, Hong Kong actress January 18 Jay Chou, Taiwanese singer, song producer and actor Paulo Ferreira, Portuguese footballer Leo Varadkar, 14th Taoiseach of Ireland[29] January 19 – Svetlana Khorkina, Russian artistic gymnast January 20 Rob Bourdon, American drummer (Linkin Park) Asaka Kubo, Japanese gravure idol Will Young, English singer[30] January 21 Brian O'Driscoll, Irish rugby union player Inul Daratista, Indonesian dangdut singer Johann Hari, Scot-Swiss Journalist and author January 23 – Larry Hughes, American basketball player January 24 – Tatyana Ali, American actress January 25 – Christine Lakin, American actress January 26 ACM Neto, Brazilian lawyer and politician Sara Rue, American actress January 27 Daniel Vettori, New Zealand cricketer January 29 – B. J. Flores, American boxer January 31 – Jenny Wolf, German speed skater February[edit] Tawakkol Karman Josh Keaton Irina Slutskaya Jesse Spencer Mena Suvari Valentino Rossi Jennifer Love Hewitt Jordan Peele February 1 Julie Augustyniak, American footballer Mahek Chahal, Norwegian actress and model Valentín Elizalde, Mexican singer (d. 2006) Peter Fulton, New Zealand cricketer Rachelle Lefevre, Canadian actress Clodoaldo Silva, Brazilian paralympian swimmer February 2 David Paisley, Scottish actor Fani Chalkia, Greek athlete Mayer Hawthorne, American soul singer Christine Lampard, Northern Irish television presenter Shamita Shetty, Indian actress and interior designer Yuichi Tsuchiya, Japanese actor February 4 Andrei Arlovski, Belarusian mixed martial artist Jodi Shilling, American actress Tabitha Brown, American actress February 5 Paulo Gonçalves, Portuguese rally racing motorcycle rider (d. 2020) Katie Brambley, Canadian distance freestyle swimmer February 6 – David Dolní?ek, Czech ice hockey player February 7 Cerina Vincent, American actress and writer Micha? Karwan, Polish footballer Tawakkol Karman, Yemeni politician, Nobel Peace Prize laureate[31] February 8 Josh Keaton, American actor Martin Rowlands, Irish footballer Aleksey Mishin, Russian wrestler February 9 Zhang Ziyi, Chinese actress and model Irina Slutskaya, Russian figure skater February 11 – Brandy Norwood, African-American singer and actress February 12 Antonio Chatman, American football player Jesse Spencer, Australian actor February 13 Anders Behring Breivik, Norwegian far-right terrorist responsible for the 2011 Norway attacks Mena Suvari, American actress Rafael Márquez, Mexican footballer February 14 – Jocelyn Quivrin, French actor (d. 2009) February 15 – Gordon Shedden, Scottish race car driver February 16 Valentino Rossi, Italian seven-time MotoGP world champion Eric Mun, leader of Korean boy-band Shinhwa February 19 Mariana Ochoa, Mexican singer and actress Vitas, Ukrainian and Russian singer and actor February 20 – Song Chong-gug, South Korean footballer February 21 Maria Annus, Estonian actress Carly Colón, Puerto Rican professional wrestler Jennifer Love Hewitt, American actress and singer Jordan Peele, American actor, comedian, writer, director, and producer February 25 – László Bodnár, Hungarian footballer February 26 Corinne Bailey Rae, British singer-songwriter and guitarist Susana Diazayas, Mexican actress February 28 Michael Bisping, Cypriot mixed martial artist Sébastien Bourdais, French racing driver Sander van Doorn, Dutch DJ and electronic music producer March[edit] Ricardo Rosselló Melina Perez Oscar Isaac Adam Levine Lee Pace Norah Jones March 4 Ben Fouhy, New Zealand flatwater canoeist Geoff Huegill, Australian swimmer Jon Fratelli, Scottish singer (The Fratellis) March 5 Martin Axenrot, Swedish metal drummer Riki Lindhome, American actress and comedian Tang Gonghong, Chinese weightlifter March 6 – Érik Bédard, Canadian pitcher March 7 Stephanie Anne Mills, Canadian voice actress Ricardo Rosselló, Puerto Rican politician, Governor of Puerto Rico March 8 Jasmine You, Japanese musician (d. 2009) Tom Chaplin, British singer (Keane) March 9 Oscar Isaac, Guatemalan-American actor Melina Perez, American professional wrestler March 12 – Pete Doherty, British singer and guitarist (The Libertines, Babyshambles) March 13 – Johan Santana, Venezuelan baseball player March 14 Nicolas Anelka, French footballer Gao Ling, Chinese badminton player Chris Klein, American actor Michele Riondino, Italian actor March 16 – Adriana Fonseca, Mexican actress and dancer [32] March 17 – Samoa Joe, American professional wrestler March 18 Shola Ama, English singer Adam Levine, American singer (Maroon 5) March 19 Emil Dimitriev, Macedonian politician, Prime Minister Hedo Türko?lu, Turkish basketball player March 20 Daniel Cormier, American retired mixed martial artist Freema Agyeman, British actress Molly Jenson, American musician Bianca Lawson, American actress March 21 – Jimenez Lai, American architect March 23 Mark Buehrle, American baseball player Bryan Fletcher, American football player March 25 Lee Pace, American actor Traxamillion, American producer rapper Gorilla Zoe, American rapper March 28 - Shakib Khan, Bangladeshi film actor, producer, singer, film organiser and media personalities[33] March 29 – Estela Giménez, Spanish gymnast March 30 Daniel Arenas, Colombian-Mexican actor Norah Jones, American musician[34] Jose Pablo Cantillo, American actor April[edit] Lindy Booth Jesse Carmichael Heath Ledger Sophie Ellis-Bextor Claire Danes Jennifer Morrison Luke Evans Kourtney Kardashian Kate Hudson James McAvoy Jaime King April 2 Lindy Booth, Canadian actress Jesse Carmichael, American musician (Maroon 5) April 3 Grégoire, French singer-songwriter Živil? Bal?i?nait?, Lithuanian long-distance runner April 4 Heath Ledger, Australian actor and music video director (d. 2008)[35] Roberto Luongo, Canadian ice hockey goaltender Maksim Opalev, Russian canoeist April 8 Mohamed Kader, Togolese footballer Alexi Laiho, Finnish musician (Children of Bodom) (d. 2020) David Petruschin, American drag queen April 9 Sebastián Silva, Chilean director, actor, screenwriter, painter and musician Keshia Knight Pulliam, African-American actress Mario Matt, Austrian alpine skier April 10 Ryan Agoncillo, Filipino actor and TV personality Rachel Corrie, American activist and diarist (d. 2003)[36] Tsuyoshi Domoto, Japanese entertainer (KinKi Kids) Sophie Ellis-Bextor, British singer April 11 Sebastien Grainger, Canadian singer and musician Michel Riesen, Swiss ice hockey player Josh Server, American actor April 12 Claire Danes, American actress Jennifer Morrison, American actress April 13 – Baron Davis, American basketball player April 14 Pedro Andrade, Brazilian journalist and model Rebecca DiPietro, American model Pierre Roland, Indonesian actor April 15 – Luke Evans, Welsh actor and singer April 17 – Sung Si-kyung, South Korean singer April 18 Michael Bradley, American basketball player Anthony Davidson, English racing driver Yusuke Kamiji, Japanese actor Kourtney Kardashian, American reality television star April 19 Kate Hudson, American actress and co-founder of Fabletics Antoaneta Stefanova, Bulgarian chess player April 20 – Teoh Beng Hock, Malaysian journalist (d. 2009) April 21 Cindy Kurleto, Filipina-Austrian model and TV personality James McAvoy, Scottish actor Karin Rask, Estonian actress April 22 – Daniel Johns, Australian musician (Silverchair) April 23 Jaime King, American actress Yana Gupta, Indian actress of Czech origin April 24 Laurentia Tan, Singaporean Paralympic equestrienne Avey Tare, American musician Adam Andretti, American race car driver April 25 Andreas Küttel, Swiss ski jumper Andrea Osvárt, Hungarian actress April 27 – Travis Meeks, American musician (Days of the New) April 28 – Bahram Radan, Iranian actor April 29 Jo O'Meara, English singer (S Club 7) April 30 – Shelley Calene-Black, American voice actress May[edit] Lance Bass Jon Montgomery Rosario Dawson Mickey Madden Maggie Q Ashley Massaro Elisabeth Harnois Jesse Bradford May 1 Roman Lyashenko, Russian ice hockey player (d. 2003) Lars Berger, Norwegian biathlete and cross-country skier Mauro Bergamasco, Italian rugby union player May 2 – Jason Chimera, Canadian ice hockey player May 3 Danny Foster, English singer (Hear'Say) Ingrid Isotamm, Estonian actress May 4 Lance Bass, American singer (NSYNC) Wes Butters, English broadcaster May 5 – Vincent Kartheiser, American actor May 6 Mark Burrier, American cartoonist Kerry Ellis, English stage actress and singer Gerd Kanter, Estonian discus thrower Jon Montgomery, Canadian former skeleton racer and television personality; host of The Amazing Race Canada May 8 – Wendy Armoko, Indonesian singer, actor, presenter and comedian May 9 Pierre Bouvier, Canadian musician Rosario Dawson, American actress May 10 Marieke Vervoort, Belgian athlete (d. 2019) Lee Hyori, South Korean entertainer May 12 – Adrian Serioux, Canadian soccer player May 13 Mickey Madden, American musician (Maroon 5) Prince Carl Philip, Duke of Värmland May 14 – Urijah Faber, WEC Featherweight Champion May 15 – James Mackenzie, Scottish actor and TV presenter May 16 Brandon Lee, Filipino-American gay pornographic film actor Jessica Morris, American actress May 18 Mariusz Lewandowski, Polish footballer Michal Martikán, Slovak slalom canoeist Jens Bergensten ("Jeb"), Swedish game designer and co-founder of the game company Mojang May 19 Andrea Pirlo, Italian footballer Diego Forlán, Uruguayan football player May 20 – Andrew Scheer, Canadian politician May 21 – Sonja Vectomov, Czech-Finnish electronic musician and composer May 22 Maggie Q, American actress Nazanin Boniadi, Iranian-British-American actress May 23 – Rasual Butler, American basketball player (d. 2018) May 24 Frank Mir, American mixed martial artist Tracy McGrady, American basketball player May 25 – Jonny Wilkinson, English rugby union player[37] May 26 Ashley Massaro, American professional wrestler and model (d. 2019) Elisabeth Harnois, American actress May 27 – Michael Buonauro, American comic creator May 28 – Jesse Bradford, American actor May 29 – Brian Kendrick, American wrestler May 30 Mike Bishai, Canadian ice hockey player Clint Bowyer, American race car driver Rie Kugimiya, Japanese voice actress and singer June[edit] Morena Baccarin Anna Torv Robyn Chris Pratt Mindy Kaling Ryan Tedder Felicia Day Matisyahu June 1 TheFatRat, German musician and producer Markus "Notch" Persson, Swedish video game programmer, designer and creator of Minecraft Rhea Santos, Filipina journalist based in Canada June 2 Choirul Huda, Indonesian professional footballer and civil servant (d. 2017) Morena Baccarin, Brazilian actress June 5 François Sagat, French male gay porn film actor, model and director Pete Wentz, American musician, lyricist and bassist (Fall Out Boy) June 6 – Shanda Sharer, American murder victim (d. 1992) June 7 Anna Torv, Australian actress Kevin Hofland, Dutch footballer June 8 Pete Orr, Canadian baseball player Eddie Hearn, British promoter June 9 – Émilie Loit, French tennis player June 10 – Lee Brice, American country music singer-songwriter June 12 Robyn, Swedish singer-songwriter Amandine Bourgeois, French singer Diego Milito, Argentine football player Jodie Prenger, British actress June 13 Nila Håkedal, Norwegian beach volleyball player Ágnes Csomor, Hungarian actress June 14 Paradorn Srichaphan, Thai tennis player June 15 – Yulia Nestsiarenka, Belarusian athlete June 16 – Ari Hest, American singer-songwriter June 17 – Young Maylay, American actor, record producer and rapper June 18 Yumiko Kobayashi, Japanese voice actress Chris Neil, Canadian ice hockey player Pini Balili, Israeli-Turkish footballer and manager[38] Ivana Wong, Hong Kong singer-songwriter June 19 John Duddy, Irish boxer Kate Tsui, Hong Kong actress June 21 Chris Pratt, American actor Makasini Richter, Tongan rugby league player June 22 Sandra Klösel, German tennis player Jai Rodriguez, American actor and musician June 23 Marilyn Agliotti, Dutch field hockey player LaDainian Tomlinson, American football player June 24 Petra N?mcová, Czech model Joaquín de Orbegoso, Peruvian actor Craig Shergold, British cancer patient Mindy Kaling, American actress, comedian and author June 25 Busy Philipps, American film actress June 26 Ryan Tedder, American singer (OneRepublic), songwriter and producer Julia Benson, Canadian actress June 27 Cazwell, American rapper and songwriter Scott Taylor, American politician Fabrizio Miccoli, Italian professional footballer June 28 Felicia Day, American actress, writer, director, violinist and singer Randy McMichael, American football player June 29 Lee Hee-joon, South Korean actor Abz Love, English singer (5ive) Marleen Veldhuis, Dutch swimmer Yehuda Levi, Israeli actor and male model Liliana Castro, Ecuadorian-born Brazilian actress Artur Avila, Brazilian and French mathematician June 30 Rick Gonzalez, American actor Ed Kavalee, Australian comedian, actor, radio and television host Faisal Shahzad, Pakistani-American bomber Matisyahu, Jewish-American reggae vocalist, beatboxer and alternative rock musician Nelson Lucas, Seychellois sprinter Christopher Jacot, Canadian actor Andy Burrows, English songwriter and musician July[edit] Kevin Hart Scott Porter Laura Benanti Jayma Mays Mike Vogel Marielle Franco Rose Byrne Mageina Tovah Michelle Williams July 1 Danisa Phiri, Zimbabwean footballer Forrest Griffin, American mixed martial arts fighter Patrik Baboumian, German-Iranian strongman competitor, strength athlete and bodybuilder July 2 Diana Gurtskaya, Georgian singer Sam Hornish Jr., American race car driver Ayiesha Woods, American singer July 3 Sayuri Katayama, Japanese actress, singer and lyricist Ludivine Sagnier, French model and actress July 4 – Kevin Thoms, American actor and voice actor July 5 Oh Dae-hwan, South Korean actor Shane Filan, Irish singer (Westlife) Amélie Mauresmo, French tennis player Darine Hamze, Lebanese actress July 6 Mohsen Bengar, Iranian footballer Kevin Hart, American actor, comedian, writer and producer July 7 Pat Barry, American kickboxer and mixed martial artist Douglas Hondo, Zimbabwean cricketer Shebly Niavarani, Swedish actor Amanda Françozo, Brazilian television presenter and model July 8 – Ben Jelen, Scottish-born American former singer-songwriter July 9 Ella Koon, Hong Kong actress Gary Chaw, Malaysian Chinese singer July 10 Gong Yoo, South Korean actor Dimitri Soudas, Canadian political consultant July 11 Im Soo-jung, South Korean actress Marina Gatell, Spanish actress July 12 Nikos Barlos, Greek basketball player and coach Justin Rockefeller, American venture capitalist and political activist Sam Golzari, British actor July 13 Dejan ?irjakovi?, Serbian actor, screenwriter and musician Daniel Galera, Brazilian writer, translator and editor Holly Gauthier-Frankel, Canadian voice actress Ladyhawke, New Zealand singer-songwriter July 14 Sioen, Belgian singer and songwriter Axel Teichmann, German cross-country skier Scott Porter, American actor and singer[39] July 15 Laura Benanti, American actress and singer Travis Fimmel, Australian fashion model and actor Philipp Karner, American actor, writer and director July 16 Landy Wen, Taiwanese singer Jayma Mays, American actress and singer Kinya Kotani, Japanese singer Kim Rhode, American double trap and skeet shooter July 17 Mike Vogel, American actor Brendan James, American piano-based singer/songwriter July 18 Rick Baxter, American politician Jason Weaver, American actor and singer July 19 Malavika, Indian actress David Sakurai, Danish-Japanese actor, director, scriptwriter and martial artist Bruno Cabrerizo, Brazilian football player, model and actor July 20 Claudine Barretto, Filipino film actress, television actress, entrepreneur and product endorser Marcos Mion, Brazilian TV host, actor, voice actor and businessman Milan Nikoli?, Serbian accordionist Adam Rose, South African professional wrestler Amr Shabana, Egyptian squash player July 22 – Parvesh Cheena, American actor July 23 – Michelle Williams, American singer and actress July 24 Rose Byrne, Australian actress Lee Si-yeon, South Korean actress Stat Quo, American rapper July 25 Juan Pablo Di Pace, Argentinian actor and singer Allister Carter, English snooker player July 26 Johnson Beharry, British recipient of the Victoria Cross Tamyra Gray, American singer Derek Paravicini, British pianist Peter Sarno, Canadian ice hockey player Mageina Tovah, American actress July 27 Marielle Franco, Brazilian politician (d. 2018) Jorge Arce, Mexican boxer Shannon Moore, American professional wrestler July 30 Carlos Arroyo, Puerto Rican basketball player[40] Show Lo, Taiwanese singer Graeme McDowell, Northern Irish professional golfer Maya Nasser, Syrian journalist (d. 2012) July 31 – B. J. Novak, American actor, director and producer August[edit] Jason Momoa Evangeline Lilly Maria Haukaas Mittet JoAnna Garcia Peter Browngardt Aaron Paul August 1 Jason Momoa, American actor Junior Agogo, Ghanaian footballer (d. 2019) Honeysuckle Weeks, British actress August 3 Danso Gordon, Canadian actor Evangeline Lilly, Canadian actress and author of children's literature Maria Haukaas Mittet, Norwegian recording artist August 4 – Patryk Dominik Sztyber, Polish rock musician August 5 – David Healy, Northern Irish footballer August 7 – Miguel Llera, Spanish footballer August 10 JoAnna Garcia, American actress Ted Geoghegan, American screenwriter August 11 Drew Nelson, Canadian actor and voice actor Bubba Crosby, American baseball player August 12 Peter Browngardt, American cartoonist Cindy Klassen, Canadian speed skater August 13 – Taiz? Sugimura, Japanese politician August 15 Carl Edwards, American race car driver Peter Shukoff, American comedian, musician and personality August 16 Sarah Balabagan, Filipina prisoner and singer August 19 – Oumar Kondé, Swiss footballer August 20 – Jamie Cullum, English jazz pianist and singer August 22 Matt Walters, American football player Angelu de Leon, Filipina actress August 23 Mulan Jameela, Indonesian singer and politician Ritchie Neville, English singer (5ive) August 24 Elva Hsiao, Taiwanese singer Michael Redd, American basketball player August 25 – Andrew Hussie, American artist August 26 Jamal Lewis, American football player Cristian Mora, Ecuadorian footballer August 27 Giovanni Capitello, American filmmaker and actor Tian Liang, Chinese diver Aaron Paul, American actor August 28 Robert Hoyzer, German football referee Yuki Maeda, Japanese singer Shane Van Dyke, American actor August 29 – Justine Pasek, Miss Universe 2002 August 30 Leon Lopez, British actor, film director, singer-songwriter and occasional model Tavia Yeung, Hong Kong actress Niki Chow, Hong Kong actress August 31 Mickie James, American professional wrestler Simon Neil, Scottish musician (vocalist, guitarist, songwriter), Biffy Clyro Marmaduke Duke Yuvan Shankar Raja, Indian film composer September[edit] Júlio César Pink Dave Annable Amy Davidson Flo Rida Taavi Rõivas Bam Margera September 1 – Neg Dupree, British comedian September 2 Ron Ng, Hong Kong actor ?ukasz ?ygad?o, Polish volleyball player September 3 – Júlio César, Brazilian football goalkeeper September 4 – Maxim Afinogenov, Russian ice hockey player September 5 John Carew, Norwegian footballer Stacey Dales, Canadian basketball player and sportscaster September 6 – Ned Collette, Australian singer and musician September 7 – Nathan Hindmarsh, Australian rugby league player September 8 Pink, American singer and actress Ashraf Sinclair, English-Malaysian actor (d. 2020) September 10 – Mustis, Norwegian pianist September 11 Ariana Richards, American actress Eric Abidal, French footballer Cameron Richardson, American actress and model September 12 Michelle Dorrance, American tap dancer Jay McGraw, American author, son of TV psychologist Dr. Phil McGraw September 13 – Ivan Miljkovi?, Serbian volleyball player September 14 Stuart Fielden, English rugby league player Chris John, Indonesian former featherweight boxing champion Kamya Panjabi, Indian television actress September 15 Dave Annable, American actor Amy Davidson, American actress Edna Ngeringway Kiplagat, Kenyan long-distance runner Patrick Marleau, Canadian ice hockey player September 16 Fanny, French singer Flo Rida, African-American rapper Soo Ae, South Korean actress September 17 Akin Ayodele, American football player Chuck Comeau, Canadian drummer September 18 Junichi Inamoto, Japanese footballer Alison Lohman, American actress September 19 – Noémie Lenoir, French supermodel September 20 – David Long, New Zealand musician September 22 – MyAnna Buring, Swedish-English actress September 23 – Lote Tuqiri, Fijian-Australian rugby player September 24 Justin Bruening, American actor and model Erin Chambers, American actress Katja Kassin, German porn actress Julia Clarete, Filipina actress September 25 Rashad Evans, American retired mixed martial artist Michele Scarponi, Italian road bicycle racer (d. 2017) September 26 Naomichi Marufuji, Japanese professional wrestler Taavi Rõivas, Prime Minister of Estonia September 27 Zoltán Horváth, Hungarian basketball player (d. 2009) Shinji Ono, Japanese football player Nathan Foley, Australian performer September 28 Bam Margera, American skateboarder Anndi McAfee, American actress and voice actress September 29 Gaitana, Ukrainian singer and songwriter of Ukrainian and Congolese descent Artika Sari Devi, Putri Indonesia 2004 September 30 Mike Damus, American actor Vince Chong, Malaysian singer Juho Kuosmanen, Finnish film director and screenwriter[41][42] October[edit] Brianna Brown Rachael Leigh Cook Aaron Ashmore Shawn Ashmore Kristanna Loken Jawed Karim Chris O'Dowd Brandon Routh John Krasinski October 1 Rudi Johnson, American football player Senit, Italian singer of Eritrean descent Marko Stanojevic, English-born Italian rugby union player October 2 – Brianna Brown, American actress October 3 Matt Davis, American stand-up comedian Josh Klinghoffer, American musician (Red Hot Chili Peppers) John Hennigan, American professional wrestler October 4 Caitriona Balfe, Irish model and actress Brandon Barash, American actor Rachael Leigh Cook, American actress Adam Voges, Australian cricketer October 5 – Gao Yuanyuan, Chinese actress October 7 Aaron Ashmore, Canadian film and television actor Shawn Ashmore, Canadian film and television actor Simona Amânar, Romanian gymnast Tang Wei, Chinese actress October 8 – Kristanna Loken, American actress and model October 9 Csézy, Hungarian singer Vernon Fox, American football player Alex Greenwald, American singer-songwriter, producer and actor (Phantom Planet and JJAMZ) Todd Kelly, Australian race car driver Chris O'Dowd, Irish actor and comedian DJ Rashad, Chicago-based electronic musician, producer and DJ (d. 2014) Hendrik Odendaal, South African swimmer Brandon Routh, American actor Gonzalo Sorondo, Uruguayan footballer October 10 Wu Chun, Bruneian actor, model and singer Nicolás Massú, Chilean tennis player Mýa, American singer and actress October 11 Bae Doona, South Korean actress Gabe Saporta, Uruguayan singer (Cobra Starship) October 13 Ryan Malcolm, Canadian singer Mamadou Niang, Senegalese footballer October 14 – Stacy Keibler, American actress and model October 15 – Jaci Velasquez, American Christian singer October 16 – Erin Brown, American actress October 17 – Kimi Räikkönen, Finnish 2007 Formula 1 world champion[citation needed] October 18 – Ne-Yo, African-American singer and songwriter October 19 – Marc Elliott, British actor October 20 John Krasinski, American actor Paul O'Connell, Irish rugby union player October 23 Jorge Solís, Mexican professional boxer Prabhas, Indian actor October 25 – Sarah Thompson, American actress October 26 – Jonathan Chase, American actor October 28 Brett Dennen, American folk/pop singer and songwriter Jawed Karim, German and Bangladeshi-American software engineer, Internet entrepreneur and co-founder of YouTube Martin Škoula, Czech ice hockey player October 30 – Yukie Nakama, Japanese actress November[edit] Lamar Odom Cote de Pablo Mpule Kwelagobe Neeti Mohan Kelly Brook Joel Kinnaman November 1 Coco Crisp, American baseball player Atsuko Enomoto, Japanese voice actress Milan Dudi?, Serbian footballer November 2 Marián ?išovský, Slovak footballer (d. 2020) Erika Flores, American actress November 3 Pablo Aimar, Argentine footballer Tim McIlrath, American rock singer, songwriter (Rise Against) November 4 – Audrey Hollander, American porn actress November 5 Leonardo Nam, Australian actor Tarek Boudali, French actor Patrick Owomoyela, German Footballer of Nigerian descent November 6 Lamar Odom, African-American retired basketball player Myolie Wu, Hong Kong actress November 7 – Jon Peter Lewis, American singer and songwriter November 8 Aaron Hughes, Northern Irish footballer Dania Ramirez, Dominican actress Salvatore Cascio, Italian actor Dania Ramirez, Dominican-American actress November 9 Darren Trumeter, American actor and comedian[43] November 12 Matt Cappotelli, American professional wrestler (d. 2018) Cote de Pablo, Chilean actress Matt Stevic, Australian rules football umpire November 13 Henry Wolfe, American actor and musician Metta World Peace, American basketball player November 14 Mavie Hörbiger, German actress Olga Kurylenko, Ukrainian model and actress Mpule Kwelagobe, Miss Universe 1999 November 17 – Matthew Spring, English footballer November 18 – Neeti Mohan, Indian playback singer November 19 Barry Jenkins, American film director, producer, and screenwriter Larry Johnson, American football player Michelle Vieth, American born Mexican actress and model[44] November 20 – Ericson Alexander Molano, Colombian gospel singer November 21 – Kim Dong-wan, South Korean singer and actor November 22 Chris Doran, Irish singer Scott Robinson, English singer (5ive) November 23 Ivica Kosteli?, Croatian alpine skier Kelly Brook, English actress and model November 25 – Joel Kinnaman, Swedish-American actor November 27 Ricky Carmichael, American motorcycle and stock car racer Hilary Hahn, American violinist November 28 Dane Bowers, English singer-songwriter (Another Level) Jamie Korab, Canadian curler Hakeem Seriki, African-American rapper (Chamillionaire) Daniel Henney, American actor and model November 29 Simon Amstell, English comedian and writer Jayceon Taylor, American rapper (The Game) November 30 Diego Klattenhoff, Canadian actor Andrés Nocioni, Argentinian basketball player December[edit] Sabina Babayeva Eric Bauza Sara Bareilles Adam Brody December 2 Sabina Babayeva, Azerbaijani singer Yvonne Catterfeld, German singer, songwriter, actress, and television personality December 3 Daniel Bedingfield, English pop singer and songwriter Rock Cartwright, American football player Robby Mook, American former political campaign strategist and campaign manager Tiffany Haddish, American actress and comedian December 7 Eric Bauza, Canadian comedian and voice actor Sara Bareilles, American singer, songwriter and pianist Ayako Fujitani, Japanese actress Jennifer Carpenter, American actress December 8 – Ingrid Michaelson, American indie pop singer-songwriter December 10 – Keiko Nemoto, Japanese voice actress December 11 – Rider Strong, American actor, director, producer and screenwriter December 12 – Emin Agalarov, Azerbaijani-Russian singer-songwriter and businessman December 14 Chris Cheng, American sport shooter Michael Owen, English footballer December 15 Adam Brody, American actor Eric Young, Canadian wrestler December 16 Trevor Immelman, South African golfer Brodie Lee, American professional wrestler (d. 2020) Daniel Narcisse, French handball player Mihai Tr?istariu, Romanian singer and musician December 17 Jaimee Foxworth, American actress and model Erion Veliaj, Albanian politician, Mayor of Tirana December 19 Kevin Devine, American songwriter and musician Paola Rey, Colombian actress and model Tara Summers, English actress December 20 – Flávio, Angolan footballer December 21 – Rutina Wesley, American actress December 22 – Petra Majdi?, Slovene cross-country skier December 23 Jacqueline Bracamontes, Mexican actress and beauty contest winner (Nuestra Belleza México 2000) Kenny Miller, Scottish football player December 25 – Ferman Akgül, vocalist of Turkish nu-metal band maNga December 26 Chris Daughtry, American singer and guitarist Dimitry Vassiliev, Russian ski jumper December 28 James Blake, American tennis pro Diego Luna, Mexican actor André Holland, American actor Bree Williamson, Canadian actress Robert Edward Davis, German-American rapper Zach Hill, American drummer (Death Grips) December 30 Milana Terloeva, Chechen journalist and author Yelawolf, American rapper December 31 Bob Bryar, American drummer (My Chemical Romance) Elaine Cassidy, Irish actress Josh Hawley, American politician, U.S. Senator (R-MO) from 2019 Deaths[edit] January[edit] Nelson Rockefeller January 3 – Conrad Hilton, American hotelier (b. 1887) January 4 – Vincent Korda, Hungarian art director (b. 1897) January 5 Billy Bletcher, American actor (b. 1894) Charles Mingus, American musician (b. 1922) January 11 – Jack Soo, Japanese-born American actor (b. 1917) January 13 – Donny Hathaway, American musician (b. 1945) January 14 – Thomas DeSimone, American gangster (b. 1950) January 15 – Charles W. Morris, American philosopher and semiotician (b. 1901) January 16 – Ted Cassidy, American actor (b. 1932) January 22 – Ali Hassan Salameh, Palestinian Leader of Black September and mastermind of the 1972 Munich Massacre (b. 1940) January 26 – Nelson Rockefeller, 41st Vice President of the United States (b. 1908) February[edit] Sid Vicious February 2 Issa Pliyev, Soviet general (b. 1903) Sid Vicious, English musician (b. 1957) February 7 – Josef Mengele, German officer and physician (b. 1911) February 10 Edvard Kardelj, Slovene general, economist, and politician, 2nd Foreign Minister of Yugoslavia (b. 1910))[45] Karl von Eberstein, German politician (b. 1894) February 12 – Jean Renoir, French film director and actor (b. 1894) February 14 – Reginald Maudling, British politician (b. 1917) February 17 – William Gargan, American actor (b. 1905) February 20 – Nereo Rocco, Italian footballer and manager (b. 1912) February 25 – Henrich Focke, German aviation pioneer (b. 1890) March[edit] José María Velasco Ibarra March 1 Mustafa Barzani, Iraqi Kurdish politician (b. 1903) Dolores Costello, American actress (b. 1903) March 15 – Léonide Massine, Russian dancer and choreographer (b. 1896) March 18 – Marjorie Daw, American actress (b. 1902) March 19 – Richard Beckinsale, British actor (b. 1947) March 22 – Ben Lyon, American actor (b. 1901) March 24 – Yvonne Mitchell, English actress (b. 1915) March 26 – Jean Stafford, American writer (b. 1915) March 29 – Sultan Yahya Petra ibni Almarhum Sultan Ibrahim Petra, Sultan of Kelantan and 6th King of Malaysia (b. 1917) March 30 Airey Neave, British politician (assassinated) (b. 1916) José María Velasco Ibarra, Ecuadorian politician, 24th President of Ecuador (b. 1893) April[edit] Zulfikar Ali Bhutto April 4 Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, 9th Prime Minister of Pakistan and 4th President of Pakistan (executed) (b. 1928) Edgar Buchanan, American actor (b. 1903) April 10 – Nino Rota, Italian composer (b. 1911)[46] April 11 – Hassan Pakravan, Iranian diplomat (b. 1911) April 19 – Wilhelm Bittrich, German Waffen SS general (b. 1894) April 23 – Blair Peach, New Zealand-born, British teacher (b. 1946)[47] April 24 – John Carroll, American actor (b. 1906) April 27 – Phan Huy Quát, Vietnamese politician (b. 1908) May[edit] Mary Pickford May 1 – Morteza Motahhari, Iranian cleric & politician (b. 1919) May 2 – Giulio Natta, Italian chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1903) May 6 – Milton Ager, American songwriter (b. 1893) May 8 – Talcott Parsons, American sociologist (b. 1902) May 11 Joan Chandler, American actress (b. 1923) Barbara Hutton, American socialite (b. 1912) May 13 – Predrag ?aji?, Bosnian Serb and Yugoslav footballer (b. 1922) May 14 – Jean Rhys, Dominican novelist (b. 1890) May 16 – A. Philip Randolph, African-American civil rights activist (b. 1889) May 27 – Ahmed Ould Bouceif, Mauritanian military officer, 2nd Prime Minister of Mauritania (b. 1934) May 29 – Mary Pickford, Canadian-American actress and producer (b. 1892) June[edit] John Wayne June 1 Ján Kadár, Czechoslovakian film director (b. 1918) Jack Mulhall, American actor (b. 1887) June 5 – Heinz Erhardt, German comedian, musician, entertainer, actor and poet (b. 1909) June 6 – Jack Haley, American actor (b. 1898) June 8 - Reinhard Gehlen, German general, 20 July Plotter (b. 1902) June 11 John Wayne, American Academy Award-winning actor and film director (b. 1907) Loren Murchison, American Olympic athlete (b. 1898) June 13 – Darla Hood, American actress (b. 1931) June 22 – Louis Chiron, Monacan Grand Prix driver (b. 1899) June 25 – Dave Fleischer, American animator (b. 1894) June 26 – Akwasi Afrifa, Ghanaian soldier and politician, Head of state (1969–1970) (b. 1936) June 29 – Lowell George, American singer, songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, and record producer (b. 1945) July[edit] Shin'ichir? Tomonaga Gustavo Diaz Ordaz July 2 – Carlyle Smith Beals, Canadian astronomer (b. 1899) July 3 – Louis Durey, French composer (b. 1888) July 4 – Theodora Kroeber, American writer and anthropologist (b. 1897) July 6 Antonio María Barbieri, Uruguay Roman Catholic cardinal (b. 1892) Van McCoy, American musician noted for his 1975 hit "The Hustle" (b. 1940) July 8 Elizabeth Ryan, American 30 Grand Slam (tennis) Tennis Champion (b. 1892) Shin'ichir? Tomonaga, Japanese physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1906) Michael Wilding, English actor (b. 1912) Robert Burns Woodward, American chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1917) July 10 – Arthur Fiedler, American conductor (Boston Pops) (b. 1894) July 12 – Minnie Riperton, American rhythm and blues singer (Lovin' You) (b. 1947) July 13 – Corinne Griffith, American actress and author (b. 1894) July 15 Gustavo Díaz Ordaz, Mexican politician, 49th President of Mexico, 1964-1970 (b. 1911)[48] Juana de Ibarbourou, Uruguayan poet (b. 1892) July 16 – Alfred Deller, English countertenor (b. 1912) July 17 – Edward Akufo-Addo, Ghanese politician and lawyer, 5th President of Ghana (b. 1906) July 20 – Sir Herbert Butterfield, English philosopher and historian (b. 1900) July 22 – Sándor Kocsis, Hungarian footballer (b. 1929) July 28 – George Seaton, American screenwriter and director (b. 1911) July 29 – Herbert Marcuse, German-American philosopher, sociologist and political theorist (b. 1898) August[edit] John Diefenbaker Mika Waltari Jean Seberg August 2 Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre, Peruvian politician, founder and leader of APRA party (b. 1895) Thurman Munson, American baseball player (b. 1947) August 3 – Bertil Ohlin, Swedish economist and Liberal politician, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences (b. 1899) August 6 – Feodor Lynen, German biochemist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (b. 1911) August 9 – Walter O'Malley, American baseball executive (b. 1903) August 10 Dick Foran, American actor (b. 1910) Mohammad Nur Ahmad Etemadi, Afghan politician, 9th Prime Minister of Afghanistan (b. 1921) August 12 – Ernst Chain, German-born British biochemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1906) August 16 – John Diefenbaker, 13th Prime Minister of Canada (b. 1895) August 17 – Vivian Vance, American actress and singer (b. 1909) August 19 – Saad Jumaa, Prime Minister of Jordan (b. 1916) August 20 – Christian Dotremont, Belgian painter and writer (b. 1922) August 21 – Stuart Heisler, American film and television director (b. 1896) August 22 – James T. Farrell, American novelist (b. 1904) August 24 Ahmad Daouk, Lebanese politician, 12th Prime Minister of Lebanon (b. 1892) Hanna Reitsch, German aviator (b. 1912) August 25 – Stan Kenton, American jazz pianist (b. 1911) August 26 Alvin Karpis, American criminal (b. 1907) Mika Waltari, Finnish author (b. 1908)[49] August 27 – Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma, British Viceroy of India (assassinated) (b. 1900) August 30 (body found on September 8) – Jean Seberg, American actress (b. 1938) August 31 – Sally Rand, American dancer (b. 1904) September[edit] Agostinho Neto Gracie Fields September 1 – Doris Kenyon, American actress (b. 1897) September 2 – Felix Aylmer, British actor (b. 1889) September 5 – Alberto di Jorio, Italian Roman Catholic cardinal (b. 1884) September 6 – Guy Bolton, British playwright (b. 1884) September 9 – Norrie Paramor, British music producer (b. 1914) September 10 – Agostinho Neto, Angolan poet and politician, 1st President of Angola (b. 1922) September 16 Giò Ponti, Italian architect, industrial designer, furniture designer and artist (b. 1891) Rob Slotemaker, Indonesian-born, Dutch Formula 1 racing car driver (b. 1929) September 20 Sultan Ismail Nasiruddin Shah, Sultan of Terengganu and 4th King of Malaysia (b. 1907) Ludvík Svoboda, 8th President of Czechoslovakia (b. 1895) September 22 Abul A'la Maududi, Pakistani journalist and philosopher (b. 1903) Otto Robert Frisch, Austrian-born British physicist (b. 1904) September 24 – Carl Laemmle Jr., American film studio executive (b. 1908) September 25 – Yury Kovalyov, Soviet footballer (b. 1934) September 26 John Cromwell, American film director and actor (b. 1887) Arthur Hunnicutt, American actor (b. 1910) September 27 Gracie Fields, British actress (b. 1898) Jimmy McCulloch, Scottish guitarist (Paul McCartney & Wings) (b. 1953) September 29 Francisco Macías Nguema, 1st President of Equatorial Guinea (executed) (b. 1924) Ivan Wyschnegradsky, Russian composer (b. 1893) October[edit] Park Chung-hee October 1 – Dorothy Arzner, American film director (b. 1897) October 6 – Elizabeth Bishop, American poet (b. 1911) October 15 – Jacob L. Devers, American army general (b. 1887) October 16 – Johan Borgen, Norwegian author (b. 1903) October 18 – Virgilio Piñera, Cuban author, playwright and poet (b. 1912) October 22 – Nadia Boulanger, French composer and composition teacher (b. 1887) October 23 – Antonio Caggiano, Argentine cardinal (b. 1889) October 25 Maphevu Dlamini, 2nd Prime Minister of Swaziland (b. 1922) Gerald Templer, British field marshal (b. 1898) October 26 – Park Chung-hee, Korean politician, 3rd President of the Republic of Korea (South Korea) (assassinated) (b. 1917) October 27 – Father Charles Coughlin, Canadian-born American priest and controversial conservative radio show commentator (b. 1891) October 30 Barnes Wallis, British aeronautical engineer (b. 1887) Rachele Mussolini, Italian, wife of Benito Mussolini (b. 1890) November[edit] Merle Oberon November 1 Albert Préjean, French actor (b. 1894) Mamie Eisenhower, 34th First Lady of the United States (b. 1896) November 2 – Jacques Mesrine, French criminal; known as the "French Robin Hood" (b. 1936) November 5 Al Capp, American cartoonist (b. 1909) Amedeo Nazzari, Italian actor (b. 1907) November 8 – Yvonne de Gaulle, French political wife of former President of France Charles de Gaulle (b. 1900) November 11 – Dimitri Tiomkin, Russian film composer (b. 1894) November 17 – Immanuel Velikovsky, Russian author and psychiatrist (b. 1895) November 23 Merle Oberon, British actress (b. 1911) Judee Sill, American singer and songwriter (b. 1944) November 26 – Marcel L'Herbier, French movie-maker (b. 1888) November 30 – Zeppo Marx, American actor and comedian (b. 1901) December[edit] Hafizullah Amin Richard Rodgers December 3 – Dhyan Chand, Indian hockey player (b. 1905) December 5 – Sonia Delaunay, Russian-born French artist (b. 1885) December 7 – Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin, British-born American astronomer and astrophysicist (b. 1900) December 9 – Fulton J. Sheen, American Roman Catholic bishop and venerable (b. 1895) December 10 – Ann Dvorak, American actress (b. 1911)[50] December 11 – James J. Gibson, American psychologist and academic (b. 1904)[51] December 13 – Jon Hall, American actor (b. 1915) December 15 – Ethel Lackie, American Olympic swimmer (b. 1907) December 16 – Vagif Mustafazadeh, Azerbaijani jazz musician (b. 1940) December 21 – Ermindo Onega, Argentine footballer (b. 1940) December 22 – Darryl F. Zanuck, American film producer (b. 1902)[52] December 23 Peggy Guggenheim, American art collector (b. 1898) Ernest B. Schoedsack, American film producer and director (b. 1893) December 24 – Rudi Dutschke, German radical student leader (b. 1940) December 25 Joan Blondell, American actress (b. 1906) Lee Bowman, American actor (b. 1914) December 26 – Helmut Hasse, German mathematician (b. 1898) December 27 – Hafizullah Amin, 2nd General Secretary of the People's Democratic Party and Chairman of the Revolutionary Council (b. 1929) December 28 – Rafael Filiberto Bonnelly, 43rd President of the Dominican Republic (b. 1904) December 30 – Richard Rodgers, American composer (b. 1902) Nobel Prizes[edit] Physics – Sheldon Lee Glashow, Abdus Salam, Steven Weinberg Chemistry – Herbert C. Brown, Georg Wittig Medicine – Allan MacLeod Cormack, Godfrey Hounsfield Literature – Odysseas Elytis Peace – Mother Teresa Economics – Theodore Schultz, W. Arthur Lewis Media[edit] The Doctor Who story City of Death is set in 1979, its year of broadcast. The events of the 2011 science fiction film Super 8 take place during 1979. 1979 Revolution: Black Friday, an interactive drama video game released in 2016, based on the events of the Iranian Revolution in 1979. References[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to 1979. ^ United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. Regional Centre for Culture and Book Development in Asia (1979). Newsletter. p. 3. ^ American Academy of Arts and Sciences (July 1994). Fundamentalisms Observed. University of Chicago Press. p. 403. ISBN 978-0-226-50878-8. ^ J. Robert Moskin, American Statecraft: The Story of the U.S. Foreign Service (Thomas Dunne Books, 2013), p. 594. ^ Daley, Jason. "Snow Falls in the Sahara for the First Time Since 1979". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved April 18, 2020. ^ "Total Eclipse of the Sun: 1979 February 26". HM Nautical Almanac Office. April 11, 2011. Archived from the original on March 28, 2006. Retrieved March 18, 2013. ^ ""Tämmöinen öljyhomma merellä on laitoksen sisäinen asia, eikä siitä tiedoteta" – Itämeren pahin öljyturma pysyi pimennossa lähes kuukauden". Yle. November 27, 2020. Retrieved November 4, 2021. ^ "1979: Three die in Golborne mine blast". On This Day. BBC. Retrieved March 18, 2013. ^ "1979: Early election as Callaghan defeated". On This Day. BBC. Retrieved March 18, 2013. ^ "1979: Thatcher wins Tory landslide". Election 2005. BBC News. April 5, 2005. Retrieved March 18, 2013. ^ a b Archontology.org: A Guide for Study of Historical Offices: South Africa: Heads of State: 1961–1994. Accessed 14 April 2017. ^ Wausau (WI) Daily Herald, June 15, 1979, p. 9; Helena (MT) Independent-Record, June 19, 1979, p. 31; Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel, June 19, 1979, p. 3; Seymour (IN) Tribune, June 20, 1979, p. 15 ^ "1979: Queen oversees Manx millennium". On This Day. BBC. Archived from the original on March 7, 2008. Retrieved January 27, 2008. ^ Annette R. Hofmann. Turnen and Sport. Waxmann Verlag. p. 224. ISBN 978-3-8309-6381-3. ^ Limbrick, Jim (2001). North Sea Divers – a Requiem. Hertford: Authors OnLine. pp. 160–162. ISBN 0-7552-0036-5. ^ Smart, Michael (2011). Into the Lion's Mouth: The Story of the Wildrake Diving Accident. Medford, Oregon: Lion's Mouth Publishing. ISBN 978-0-615-52838-0. ^ "US Marine Corps". Archived from the original on February 25, 2008. Retrieved March 3, 2016. ^ "U.S. fast food hits Singapore". The Telegraph. October 8, 1980. Retrieved November 13, 2014. ^ "Singapore's Orchard Road: You Can Shop Until You Drop". Daily News. April 11, 1990. Retrieved November 13, 2014. ^ "Smallpox Has Been Eradicated", Associated Press Report in Santa Cruz (CA) Sentinel, October 26, 1979, p. 1 ^ "Smallpox: Mankind Says Goodbye To A Ruthless Killer", by David Zinman, Pittsburgh Press, October 11, 1979, p. B-1 ^ "1979: Paperboy's killers convicted". On This Day. BBC. Retrieved March 18, 2013. ^ "False Alarms on the Nuclear Front". Pbs.org. May 3, 2001. Retrieved April 29, 2014. ^ Tendler, Stewart; Bradley, Ian (November 16, 1979). "Professor Blunt named as spy". The Times (60476). London. p. 1. ^ Mr. Anthony Blunt. Hansard HC Deb (November 21, 1979) 974/402-520. ^ "Rong Yiren | Chinese official". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved December 4, 2020. ^ Diehl, Matt (2007). My So-Called Punk: Green Day, Fall Out Boy, the Distillers, Bad Religion—How Neo-Punk Stage-Dived into the Mainstream. New York: St. Martin's Griffin. p. 92. ^ "Kevin Kuske". IBSF. Retrieved October 27, 2020. ^ "Terence Morris Stats". Basketball-Reference.com. ^ Philip Ryan; Niall O'Connor (August 30, 2018). Leo: A Very Modern Taoiseach. Biteback Publishing. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-78590-372-4. ^ McPhee, Erica (2005). Will Young: The Biography. London, UK: Michael O'Mara Books. p. 14. ISBN 1-84317-175-9. ^ "Tawakkul Karm?n". Britannica Presents 100 Women Trailblazers. March 25, 2020. Retrieved July 26, 2021. ^ "Adriana Fonseca participará en Tiempo final". El Universal (in Spanish). March 15, 2009. Retrieved May 24, 2010. ^ Culture, Desk (March 27, 2018). "Happy birthday, Shakib Khan". Daily Sun. Retrieved January 14, 2020. ^ Dilworth, Thomas J. (July 6, 2007). "What's Next for Norah Jones?". ABC News. Archived from the original on June 28, 2011. Retrieved November 19, 2009. ^ Savage, Michael (January 23, 2008). "Heath Ledger: The Times Obituary". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on July 26, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008. ^ "A Time to Remember Solidarity and the Best in Humanity: Commemorating Rachel Corrie (10 April 1979 – 16 March 2003)". Al-Haq | Defending Human rights in Palestine since 1979. Retrieved February 19, 2021. ^ Chris Schoeman (2007). Legends of the Ball: Rugby's Greatest Players Chosen by Willie John McBride, Frik Du Preez, David Compese. CJS Books. p. 106. ISBN 978-0-620-36962-6. ^ "Pini Balili - FIFA 08 - Player Stats". fifaindex.com. ^ Scott Porter [@ScottPorter] (July 14, 2016). "Just wanted to say I'm overwhelmed with all the birthday wishes. Much love to all my virtual friends out there! Thank you!" (Tweet). Retrieved July 14, 2016 – via Twitter. ^ "Carlos Arroyo Stats". Basketball-Reference.com. ^ Torino Film Lab: Juho Kuosmanen ^ YLE: Ohjaaja Juho Kuosmanen kertaa riemukasta iltaa Cannesin elokuvajuhlilla – "Ehkä meidät kutsuttiin, koska olimme kaupungissa", voittaja arveli ennen kuin totuus paljastui (in Finnish) ^ "Darren Trumeter". IMDb. ^ "Michelle Vieth", Las Noticias Mexico.com (in Spanish), retrieved August 24, 2019 ^ Bernard A. Cook (2001). Europe Since 1945: An Encyclopedia. Taylor & Francis. p. 710. ISBN 978-0-8153-4058-4. ^ Gino Moliterno (September 11, 2002). Encyclopedia of Contemporary Italian Culture. Routledge. p. 733. ISBN 978-1-134-75876-0. ^ Dummett, Michael (1980). The Death of Blair Peach: the Supplementary Report of the Unofficial Committee of Enquiry. London: National Council for Civil Liberties. ISBN 978-0-9011-0891-3. ^ "Gustavo Díaz Ordaz" (in Spanish). Busca Biografias. Retrieved May 30, 2019. ^ Hejkalová, Markéta (2008) [2007 (Czech)]. Mika Waltari: The Finn. Translated by Turner, Gerald. Helsinki: WSOY. p. 171. ISBN 978-951-0-34335-7. ^ "Ann Dvorak Dies; Screen Actress, 67". The New York Times. December 20, 1979. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 22, 2020. ^ Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc. (May 1, 2008). Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc. p. 761. ISBN 978-1-59339-492-9. ^ Arnold, Gary (December 24, 1979). "Motion Picture Producer Darryl F. Zanuck Is Dead at 77". Retrieved August 31, 2017 – via WashingtonPost.com. Further reading[edit] Caryl, Christian, Strange Rebels: 1979 and the Birth of the 21st Century (2013), 1979 as worldwide turning point; excerpt and text search Facts on File. Facts on File Yearbook: 1979 (1980) weekly factual report on events worldwide. Hodson, H.V. Annual Register of World Events 1979 (1980), in-depth coverage of major countries Paxton, John, ed. Statesman's Yearbook 1978–1979 (1980), statistical details on all countries Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=1979&oldid=1055924365" Categories: 1979 Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Use mdy dates from August 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Articles using Mw magnitude scale Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 AC with 0 elements Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Languages Acèh Afrikaans Alemannisch ???? Anarâškielâ ?????? ??????? Aragonés ?????????????? Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'? ???? Az?rbaycanca ?????? Basa Bali ????? Banjar Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? Bikol Central ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti ???????? Emiliàn e rumagnòl ?????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kab?y? ????? Kapampangan ????????-??????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Kiswahili ???? Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî ???????? ????? ???? ??? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Limburgs Lingála Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ????????? ???? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mìng-d??ng-ng?? ??????? ?????? ?????????? N?huatl Dorerin Naoero Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan ???? ????? ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ???? ?????? Papiamentu Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Q?r?mtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sardu Seeltersk Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?l?nski Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Tetun ??? ?????? Türkçe Türkmençe ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Võro Walon ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki Zeêuws Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 18 November 2021, at 17:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement