https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armed_Forces_Day_(Bangladesh) Armed Forces Day (Bangladesh) - Wikipedia Armed Forces Day (Bangladesh) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Armed Forces Day ??????? ?????? ???? Shikha Anirban (the Eternal Flame) at Dhaka Cantonment, where the president and prime minister of Bangladesh place wreaths on 21 November annually Observed by Bangladesh Significance Celebrates the official founding of the Bangladesh Armed Forces Celebrations State ceremonies Date 21 November Next time 21 November 2021 (2021-11) Frequency annual Armed Forces Day (Bengali: ??????? ?????? ????) is observed in Bangladesh on 21 November. This signifies the day in 1971, when the members of the Bangladesh army, navy and air force were officially united and launched joint operations along with the people against the Pakistan occupation forces.[1][2] On 16 December 1971, the Pakistani Army of 93,000 surrendered to the allied forces of Bangladesh Forces and Indian Army (The Joint Command), ending the Liberation War of Bangladesh. Contents 1 Significance 2 History 3 Programs 4 See also 5 References Significance[edit] On 21 November, after almost nine months into the war of liberation, all three forces led a joint operation simultaneously, marking the day to be the day as Armed Forces Day. The joining of these forces resulted in large areas along the border to be liberated every day. This allowed the Bangladesh Forces to disrupt the lines of communication within a few days.[3] This day bears special significance in the history of Bangladesh and is being celebrated every year with due solemnity and importance, to honour the sacrifices made by the members of the Bangladesh Armed forces, who fought and gave their lives in the liberation war.[4] History[edit] Bangladesh Liberation War initially commenced in the form of resistance movement as the Pakistan Army cracked down on 25 March 1971 primarily at Dhaka and subsequently extending it to the entire of Bangladesh. Gradually, the Bangladesh Forces organised small groups of guerrilla fighters who followed 'hit and run'[5] tactics. As a third stage in the war, the Bengali military personnel who were members of Pakistan Army, Navy and Air Force deserted their respective units to join Bangladesh Forces and organised them into regular units across the border of Indian territory primarily as Land Force. A small group of Naval Commandos also opened the Naval wing and a few Pilots and Airmen formed the Air Wing. Bangladesh Army After a prolonged guerrilla warfare was launched by Bangladesh Forces, which continued for a number of months. A further restructuring was undertaken, and the Bangladesh Forces were organised into three brigade size combat groups. 'Z' Force,:[3] Lieutenant Colonel Ziaur Rahman was the commander of this force. The brigade was formed with the 1st, 3rd and 8th Battalion of East Bengal Regiment on 7 July 1971. The Z Force was raised at the foothills of Tura hill, opposite to Mymensingh.[3] 'K' Force: Lieutenant Colonel (later Brigadier) Khaled Mosharraf was the commander of this force. The brigade was formed at Agartala,[3] with the 4th, 9th and 10th Battalion of East Bengal Regiment on the month of September 1971. 'S' Force: Major K M Shafiullah was the commander of this force. The Brigade was formed at Hezamara,[3] with the 2nd and 11th Battalion of East Bengal Regiment on the month of October 1971.[6] Bangladesh Navy Many of the Bengali sailors and officers in the Pakistan Navy decamped, to form an emerging Bangladesh Navy. Initially, there were two ships BNS Padma (1973) and PALASH and 45 navy personnel. They prevented the supply of arms, ammunitions and rations for the occupation forces. This operation from the Naval Commandos made Ports in Chittagong and Mongla highly lethal for the occupation forces.[3] Bangladesh Air Force The official date of formation of the Bangladesh Air Force (BAF) has been established as 28 September 1971 and it was launched formally by the Government on 8 October 1971. BAF was formed with all officers and airmen of Bengali origin serving in the Pakistan Air Force prior to the war. Out of 11 BDF Sectors, the most tactically significant sector, the Central Sector – Sector 11, was in command of a BAF officer including Sector 6. The BAF started their operation from an abandoned airfield at Dimapur.[3] Programs[edit] Main article: Armed Forces Day The day starts with laying of floral wreath at 'Shikha Anirban' (Eternal Flame) at Dhaka Cantonment by the President, the Prime Minister and the Service Chiefs. In the afternoon a reception at Senakunja, Dhaka Cantonment is held where the Prime Minister, ministers, the leader of opposition and other high civil and military officials attend.[7][8] In other Cantonments, naval and air bases similar receptions are held. A special TV programme "Anirban" is broadcast on different TV channels the previous evening and special newspaper supplements are also published with national dailies. Receptions are also held by the Prime Minister and Service Chiefs for recipients of the gallantry award Freedom fighter. Improved meals for family members are served in all military stations. Armed Forces Division also brings out a special publication with articles related to the War of Independence and armed forces.[9][10] See also[edit] Armed Forces Day References[edit] ^ https://www.afd.gov.bd/index.php/media/important-occations/armed-forces-day ^ "Govt will continue efforts to modernise armed forces: PM". Bangladesh Sangbad Sangstha. 20 November 2002. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. ^ a b c d e f g Hanif, Mohd. (22 November 2009). "Significance of Armed Forces Day". The Daily Star. Retrieved 11 August 2014. ^ http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2019-11/21/c_138572918.htm ^ Iqbal, Mumtaz. "Why the Movement for Bangladesh Succeeded: A Military Appreciation". Defence Journal. Archived from the original on 19 March 2009. ^ https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/armed-forces-day-today-1998409 ^ "Bangladesh to be victorious, prosperous". The Daily Star. 22 November 2015. Retrieved 3 April 2017. ^ "BNP unhappy over protocol at Senakunja reception". www.observerbd.com. Retrieved 3 April 2017. ^ "President, PM pay tribute on Armed Forces Day". bdnews24.com. Retrieved 3 April 2017. ^ "Armed Forces Day Sunday". The Financial Express Online Version. Retrieved 3 April 2017. v t e Bangladesh Armed Forces  Bangladesh Army    Bangladesh Navy    Bangladesh Air Force Organization Armed Forces Division Bangladesh Forces Ministry of Defence Directorate General of Forces Intelligence Inter-Service Public Relations Army formations Military installations East Bengal Regiment Senior Tigers Bangladesh Infantry Regiment UN Peacekeeping Force Armed Forces Day Leadership Commander-in-chief: President of Bangladesh Chief of Air Staff Chief of Army Staff Chief of Naval Staff Principal Staff Officer serving Generals serving Air Marshals serving Admirals History and wars Military history Bengal Army Bengal Regiment Bangladesh Liberation War Gulf War Chattogram Hill Tracts conflict 2001 Bangladesh–India border clashes 2015 Bangladesh–Arakan Army border clash War leaders M.A.G. Osmani Ziaur Rahman M. Hamidullah Khan Khaled Mosharraf Khademul Bashar M. A. Jalil Abul Manzoor Shafaat Jamil Abu Osman Chowdhury Quazi Nuruzzaman Abu Taher Decorations Bir Shreshtho Bir Uttom Bir Bikrom Bir Protik Order of Military Merit Personnel and equipment Ranks Military ranks of Bangladesh Training ARTDOC National Defence College Defence Services Command and Staff College School of Infantry and Tactics BUP BAIUST BAUET BAUST BIPSOT Military Academy Air Force Academy Naval Academy AFMC AFMI MIST National Cadet Corps Cadet Colleges Equipment Army equipment Active Military aircraft Historic Military aircraft Navy ships active historic Special ops President Guard Regiment SSF Para-Commandos SWADS Counter Terrorism and Intelligence Bureau v t e Bangladesh Liberation War Ministry of Liberation War Affairs Origins of the Bengali Revolution Philosophy Bengali Renaissance Muslim nationalism in South Asia Two-nation theory Bengali nationalism Bengal studies Bangamata Joy Bangla Pakistan Movement Partition of Bengal (1905) Eastern Bengal and Assam All-India Muslim League Indian independence movement Pakistan Movement Lahore Resolution United Bengal Muslim National Guard Direct Action Day Noakhali riots Partition of India Partition of Bengal (1947) East Pakistan Dominion of Pakistan East Bengal Pakistan Muslim League Objectives Resolution All Pakistan Awami Muslim League Awami League United Front Bengali language movement One Unit East Pakistan Constitution of Pakistan of 1956 1958 Pakistani coup d'état Constitution of Pakistan of 1962 Bengali self-determination Swadhin Bangla Biplobi Parishad Six point movement Agartala Conspiracy Case 1969 uprising in East Pakistan 1970 Bhola cyclone 1970 Pakistani general election Declaration of war Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's speech of 7 March Rodionov message Admiral Ahsan Mission Operation Searchlight Proclamation of Bangladeshi Independence Combatants Campaigns Theaters Battles Events Massacres Combatants Bangladesh Provisional Government of Bangladesh Mukti Bahini Bangladesh Army K Force S Force Z Force Bangladesh Navy Bangladesh Air Force Bangladesh Rifles Bangladesh Ansar Bangladesh Police Special Guerrilla Forces Gono Bahini Mujib Bahini Kader Bahini Baten Bahini Afsar Bahini Hemayet Bahini Crack Platoon Pakistan Pakistan Armed Forces Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines Jamaat-e-Islami Central Peace Committee Razakars Al-Badr Al-Shams Indian allies Parliament of India Indian Armed Forces Army, Navy, Air Force Mitro Bahini (Indo-Bangali group) Campaigns and theaters Pakistan Eastern Command Operation Searchlight Operation Barisal Cable 1971 Sectors in the Bangladesh Liberation War Military plans of the Bangladesh Liberation War Eastern Command (India) Bangladesh War timeline Meghna Heli Bridge Operation Jackpot Mutiny on PNS Mangro in Toulon Operation Python Operation Trident Pakistan Army order of battle, December 1971 Mitro Bahini Order of Battle December 1971 Sinking of PNS Ghazi East Pakistan Air Operations, 1971 Operation Chengiz Khan Operation Cactus-Lilly Major battles Battle of Daruin Battle of Rangamati-Mahalchari waterway Battle of Goalhati Battle of Dhalai Outpost Battle of Dhalai Battle of Ajmiriganj Battle of Garibpur Battle of Hilli Battle of Longewala Battle of Basantar Battle of Kushtia Battle of Boyra Battle of Atgram Other events Blood Telegram 1971 Bangladesh genocide 1971 killing of Bengali intellectuals Rape during the Bangladesh Liberation War Refugees in India Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra Shadhin Bangla Football Team The Concert for Bangladesh Album Film List of Massacres 1971 Dhaka University massacre Shankharibazar massacre Ramna massacre Sutrapur massacre Jinjira massacre Akhira massacre Jathibhanga massacre Demra massacre Chuknagar massacre Madhyapara massacre Bakhrabad massacre Burunga massacre more Related conflicts Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 Indo-Pakistani Naval War of 1971 Leaders Bangladesh Military M. A. G. Osmani Ziaur Rahman Khaled Mosharraf K M Shafiullah Shafaat Jamil A. K. Khandker Muhammad Hamidullah Khan Matiur Rahman Civilian Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Syed Nazrul Islam Tajuddin Ahmad AHM Qamaruzzaman Muhammad Hamidullah Khan Serajul Alam Khan Dhirendranath Datta Kazi Nuruzzaman Chitta Ranjan Dutta Muhammad Mansur Ali Khondaker Mostaq Ahmad M. A. Hannan Abu Sayeed Chowdhury Pakistan Military Yahya Khan Tikka Khan S.M. Ahsan A.K. Niazi Yaqub Ali Khan Mohammad Shariff Rao Farman Ali A.O. Mitha Khadim Hussain Mitty Masud Ahmad Zamir Inamul Haque Siddique Salik K.M. Arif Civilian Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Dr. Abdul Motaleb Malik Nurul Amin Shah Azizur Rahman Ghulam Azam Motiur Rahman Nizami J.A. Rahim Tridev Roy Indian allies Military Indian Army Sam Manekshaw Jagjit Singh Aurora Hari Chand Dewan Nilakanta Krishnan J. F. R. Jacob Om Prakash Malhotra Sagat Singh Inderjit Singh Gill Shabeg Singh K. Sankaran Nair Hoshiar Singh Dahiya Civilian Indira Gandhi V. V. Giri Gopal Swarup Pathak Rameshwar Kao Swaran Singh Jagjivan Ram Dilip Mahalanabis Aftermath Pakistani Instrument of Surrender International recognition of Bangladesh Simla Agreement Delhi Agreement Stranded Pakistanis in Bangladesh Hamoodur Rahman Commission War Report 1971 Prisoners of War Investigation Bangladeshi nationalism Bangladesh–India relations Indira-Mujib Treaty 2001 Indo-Bangla skirmishes Deaths along the Bangladesh–India border Bangladesh–Pakistan relations 2013 Pakistan Embassy siege 2015 Expulsion of Pakistani diplomats from Dhaka Related topics Categories Commemoration Monuments and memorials National Martyrs’ Memorial Martyred Intellectuals Memorial Swadhinata Stambha Liberation War Memorial Trust Liberation War Museum Bangladesh Police Liberation War Museum Aparajeyo Bangla Shabash Bangladesh Anniversaries Bengali Genocide Remembrance Day Independence Day (Bangladesh) Armed Forces Day (Bangladesh) Martyred Intellectuals Day Victory day of Bangladesh Vijay Diwas (India) Decorations and depictions Muktijuddho e-Archive Artistic depictions Awards and decorations Trials 2013 Shahbag protests Movement demanding trial of war criminals (Bangladesh) International Crimes Tribunal (Bangladesh) War Crimes Fact Finding Committee Categories Liberation War Genocide Aftermath Films Causes and prelude Battles Peoples Military personnel Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Armed_Forces_Day_(Bangladesh)&oldid=1056362889" Categories: Remembrance days Public holidays in Bangladesh Military of Bangladesh History of Bangladesh November observances Autumn events in Bangladesh Hidden categories: EngvarB from March 2017 Use dmy dates from November 2018 Infobox holiday fixed day (2) Articles containing Bengali-language text Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ????? Bahasa Indonesia ????? Edit links This page was last edited on 21 November 2021, at 09:44 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement