https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashlar Ashlar - Wikipedia Ashlar From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Finely dressed stone and associated masonry This article may be confusing or unclear to readers. Please help clarify the article. There might be a discussion about this on the talk page. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Dry ashlar masonry laid in parallel courses on an Inca wall at Machu Picchu Ashlar masonry north gable of Banbury Town Hall, Oxfordshire Ashlar polygonal masonry in Cuzco, Peru Quarry-faced red Longmeadow sandstone in random ashlar was specified by architect Henry Hobson Richardson for the North Congregational Church (Springfield, Massachusetts, 1871). Although each block was cut with great precision on adjacent faces, the external face was left rough as when removed from the quarry. The blocks were laid randomly without continuous courses or vertical and horizontal joints. Ashlar (/?æ?l?r/) is finely dressed (cut, worked) stone, either an individual stone that has been worked until squared, or a structure built from such stones. Ashlar is the finest stone masonry unit, generally rectangular cuboid, mentioned by Vitruvius as opus isodomum, or less frequently trapezoidal. Precisely cut "on all faces adjacent to those of other stones", ashlar is capable of very thin joints between blocks, and the visible face of the stone may be quarry-faced or feature a variety of treatments: tooled, smoothly polished or rendered with another material for decorative effect.[1][2] One such decorative treatment consists of small grooves achieved by the application of a metal comb. Generally used only on softer stone ashlar, this decoration is known as "mason's drag".[3] Ashlar is in contrast to rubble masonry, which employs irregularly shaped stones, sometimes minimally worked or selected for similar size, or both. Ashlar is related but distinct from other stone masonry that is finely dressed but not quadrilateral, such as curvilinear and polygonal masonry.[2][4] Ashlar may be coursed, which involves lengthy horizontal layers of stone blocks laid in parallel, and therefore with continuous horizontal joints. Ashlar may also be random, which involves stone blocks laid with deliberately discontinuous courses and therefore discontinuous joints both vertically and horizontally. In either case, it generally uses a joining material such as mortar to bind the blocks together, although dry ashlar construction, metal ties, and other methods of assembly have been used. The dry ashlar of Inca architecture in Cusco and Machu Picchu is particularly fine and famous. Contents 1 Etymology 2 Use 3 As metaphor 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Etymology[edit] The word is attested in Middle English and derives from the Old French aisselier, from the Latin axilla, a diminutive of axis, meaning "plank".[5] "Clene hewen ashler" often occurs in medieval documents; this means tooled or finely worked, in contradistinction to rough-axed faces.[6] Use[edit] Ashlar blocks have been used in the construction of many buildings as an alternative to brick or other materials. In classical architecture, ashlar wall surfaces were often contrasted with rustication. The term is frequently used to describe the dressed stone work of prehistoric Greece and Crete, although the dressed blocks are usually much larger than modern ashlar. For example, the tholos tombs of Bronze Age Mycenae use ashlar masonry in the construction of the so-called "beehive" dome. This dome consists of finely cut ashlar blocks that decrease in size and terminate in a central capstone.[7] These domes are not true domes, but are constructed using the corbel arch. Ashlar masonry was also heavily used in the construction of palace facades on Crete, including Knossos and Phaistos. These constructions date to the MM III-LM Ib period, c. 1700–1450 BC. In modern European masonry the blocks are generally about 35 centimetres (14 in) in height. When shorter than 30 centimetres (12 in), they are usually called small ashlar. As metaphor[edit] In some Masonic groupings, which such societies term jurisdictions, ashlars are used as a symbolic metaphor for how one's personal development relates to the tenets of their lodge. As described in the explanation of the First Degree Tracing Board, in Emulation and other Masonic rituals the rough ashlar is a stone as taken directly from the quarry, and allegorically represents the Freemason prior to his initiation; a smooth ashlar (or "perfect ashlar") is a stone that has been smoothed and dressed by the experienced stonemason, and allegorically represents the Freemason who, through education and diligence, has learned the lessons of Freemasonry and who lives an upstanding life.[8] See also[edit] Ablaq Dimension stone Opus quadratum Stone cladding Stone veneer References[edit] ^ Ching, Francis D. K.; Jarzombek, Mark M.; Prakash, Vikramaditya (2007). A Global History of Architecture. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. p. 759. ISBN 978-0-471-26892-5. ^ a b Sharon, Ilan (August 1987). "Phoenician and Greek Ashlar Construction Techniques at Tel Dor, Israel". Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research. Boston: The American Schools of Oriental Research (267): 32–33. ^ "The Conservation Glossary". University of Dundee. Archived from the original on 2010-05-19. Retrieved 2009-05-04. ^ Wright, George R. H. (2000). Ancient Building Technology, Vol 1: Historical Background. Technology and Change in History. Leiden, The Netherlands: E. J. Brill. p. 100. ISBN 978-90-04-09969-2. OCLC 490715142. ^ "Definition of ashlar". Oxford Dictionaries. ^  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Ashlar". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 733. This also attests the alternative spellings ashler and ashelere. ^ Preziosi, D.; Hitchcock, L. A. (1999). Aegean Art and Architecture. Oxford History of Art. pp. 175–6. ISBN 0-19-284208-0. ^ "Rough and Perfect Ashlar". Masonic Lodge of Education. Retrieved 15 March 2015. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ashlar. Look up ashlar in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. v t e Stonemasonry Types Ashlar Rustication Carving Dry stone Letter cutting Masonry Monumental Rubble Sculpture Slipform Snecked Materials List of stone Artificial stone Brick Cast stone Decorative stones Dimension stone Fieldstone Flagstone Gabion Granite Grout Marble Mortar Sandstone Slate Tools Angle grinder Bush hammer Ceramic tile cutter Chisel Diamond blade Lewis (lifting appliance) Non-explosive demolition agents Plug and feather Stonemason's hammer Straightedge Trowel Techniques Brickwork Flaming Flushwork Knapping Polygonal masonry Repointing Scabbling Tuckpointing Products Castle Hardstone carving Headstone (Footstone) Mosaic Sculpture Stone wall Machicolation Organizations International Union of Bricklayers and Allied Craftworkers Master of Work to the Crown of Scotland Mason Contractors Association of America Operative Plasterers' and Cement Masons' International Association Worshipful Company of Masons Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ashlar&oldid=1040288472" Categories: Building stone Stonemasonry Types of wall Wallcoverings Architectural elements Garden features Masonic symbolism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2021 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Commons category link is on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Esperanto ????? Français ??? Ido Italiano Magyar Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Polski Svenska Edit links This page was last edited on 23 August 2021, at 18:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashlar Ashlar - Wikipedia Ashlar From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Finely dressed stone and associated masonry This article may be confusing or unclear to readers. Please help clarify the article. There might be a discussion about this on the talk page. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Dry ashlar masonry laid in parallel courses on an Inca wall at Machu Picchu Ashlar masonry north gable of Banbury Town Hall, Oxfordshire Ashlar polygonal masonry in Cuzco, Peru Quarry-faced red Longmeadow sandstone in random ashlar was specified by architect Henry Hobson Richardson for the North Congregational Church (Springfield, Massachusetts, 1871). Although each block was cut with great precision on adjacent faces, the external face was left rough as when removed from the quarry. The blocks were laid randomly without continuous courses or vertical and horizontal joints. Ashlar (/?æ?l?r/) is finely dressed (cut, worked) stone, either an individual stone that has been worked until squared, or a structure built from such stones. Ashlar is the finest stone masonry unit, generally rectangular cuboid, mentioned by Vitruvius as opus isodomum, or less frequently trapezoidal. Precisely cut "on all faces adjacent to those of other stones", ashlar is capable of very thin joints between blocks, and the visible face of the stone may be quarry-faced or feature a variety of treatments: tooled, smoothly polished or rendered with another material for decorative effect.[1][2] One such decorative treatment consists of small grooves achieved by the application of a metal comb. Generally used only on softer stone ashlar, this decoration is known as "mason's drag".[3] Ashlar is in contrast to rubble masonry, which employs irregularly shaped stones, sometimes minimally worked or selected for similar size, or both. Ashlar is related but distinct from other stone masonry that is finely dressed but not quadrilateral, such as curvilinear and polygonal masonry.[2][4] Ashlar may be coursed, which involves lengthy horizontal layers of stone blocks laid in parallel, and therefore with continuous horizontal joints. Ashlar may also be random, which involves stone blocks laid with deliberately discontinuous courses and therefore discontinuous joints both vertically and horizontally. In either case, it generally uses a joining material such as mortar to bind the blocks together, although dry ashlar construction, metal ties, and other methods of assembly have been used. The dry ashlar of Inca architecture in Cusco and Machu Picchu is particularly fine and famous. Contents 1 Etymology 2 Use 3 As metaphor 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Etymology[edit] The word is attested in Middle English and derives from the Old French aisselier, from the Latin axilla, a diminutive of axis, meaning "plank".[5] "Clene hewen ashler" often occurs in medieval documents; this means tooled or finely worked, in contradistinction to rough-axed faces.[6] Use[edit] Ashlar blocks have been used in the construction of many buildings as an alternative to brick or other materials. In classical architecture, ashlar wall surfaces were often contrasted with rustication. The term is frequently used to describe the dressed stone work of prehistoric Greece and Crete, although the dressed blocks are usually much larger than modern ashlar. For example, the tholos tombs of Bronze Age Mycenae use ashlar masonry in the construction of the so-called "beehive" dome. This dome consists of finely cut ashlar blocks that decrease in size and terminate in a central capstone.[7] These domes are not true domes, but are constructed using the corbel arch. Ashlar masonry was also heavily used in the construction of palace facades on Crete, including Knossos and Phaistos. These constructions date to the MM III-LM Ib period, c. 1700–1450 BC. In modern European masonry the blocks are generally about 35 centimetres (14 in) in height. When shorter than 30 centimetres (12 in), they are usually called small ashlar. As metaphor[edit] In some Masonic groupings, which such societies term jurisdictions, ashlars are used as a symbolic metaphor for how one's personal development relates to the tenets of their lodge. As described in the explanation of the First Degree Tracing Board, in Emulation and other Masonic rituals the rough ashlar is a stone as taken directly from the quarry, and allegorically represents the Freemason prior to his initiation; a smooth ashlar (or "perfect ashlar") is a stone that has been smoothed and dressed by the experienced stonemason, and allegorically represents the Freemason who, through education and diligence, has learned the lessons of Freemasonry and who lives an upstanding life.[8] See also[edit] Ablaq Dimension stone Opus quadratum Stone cladding Stone veneer References[edit] ^ Ching, Francis D. K.; Jarzombek, Mark M.; Prakash, Vikramaditya (2007). A Global History of Architecture. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. p. 759. ISBN 978-0-471-26892-5. ^ a b Sharon, Ilan (August 1987). "Phoenician and Greek Ashlar Construction Techniques at Tel Dor, Israel". Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research. Boston: The American Schools of Oriental Research (267): 32–33. ^ "The Conservation Glossary". University of Dundee. Archived from the original on 2010-05-19. Retrieved 2009-05-04. ^ Wright, George R. H. (2000). Ancient Building Technology, Vol 1: Historical Background. Technology and Change in History. Leiden, The Netherlands: E. J. Brill. p. 100. ISBN 978-90-04-09969-2. OCLC 490715142. ^ "Definition of ashlar". Oxford Dictionaries. ^  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Ashlar". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 733. This also attests the alternative spellings ashler and ashelere. ^ Preziosi, D.; Hitchcock, L. A. (1999). Aegean Art and Architecture. Oxford History of Art. pp. 175–6. ISBN 0-19-284208-0. ^ "Rough and Perfect Ashlar". Masonic Lodge of Education. Retrieved 15 March 2015. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ashlar. Look up ashlar in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. v t e Stonemasonry Types Ashlar Rustication Carving Dry stone Letter cutting Masonry Monumental Rubble Sculpture Slipform Snecked Materials List of stone Artificial stone Brick Cast stone Decorative stones Dimension stone Fieldstone Flagstone Gabion Granite Grout Marble Mortar Sandstone Slate Tools Angle grinder Bush hammer Ceramic tile cutter Chisel Diamond blade Lewis (lifting appliance) Non-explosive demolition agents Plug and feather Stonemason's hammer Straightedge Trowel Techniques Brickwork Flaming Flushwork Knapping Polygonal masonry Repointing Scabbling Tuckpointing Products Castle Hardstone carving Headstone (Footstone) Mosaic Sculpture Stone wall Machicolation Organizations International Union of Bricklayers and Allied Craftworkers Master of Work to the Crown of Scotland Mason Contractors Association of America Operative Plasterers' and Cement Masons' International Association Worshipful Company of Masons Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ashlar&oldid=1040288472" Categories: Building stone Stonemasonry Types of wall Wallcoverings Architectural elements Garden features Masonic symbolism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2021 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Commons category link is on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Esperanto ????? Français ??? Ido Italiano Magyar Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Polski Svenska Edit links This page was last edited on 23 August 2021, at 18:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement