https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bagrat_V_of_Georgia Bagrat V of Georgia - Wikipedia Bagrat V of Georgia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Monarch This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Bagrat V of Georgia" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Bagrat V ?????? V King of Georgia (more...) Predecessor David IX Successor George VII Died 1393 Burial Gelati Monastery Spouse Helena Megale Komnene (d. 1366) Anna Megale Komnene (m. 1367) Issue George VII Constantine I Dynasty Bagrationi Father David IX of Georgia Mother Sindukhtar Jaqeli Religion Georgian Orthodox Church Bagrat V the Great (Georgian: ?????? V ????, Bagrat V Didi) (died 1393) from the Bagrationi dynasty was the son of the Georgian king David IX of Georgia by his wife Sindukhtar Jaqeli. He was co-ruler from 1355, and became king after the death of his father in 1360. Life[edit] A fair and popular ruler, also known as a perfect soldier, he was dubbed "Bagrat the Great" by his multi-ethnic subjects.[citation needed] The Trapezuntine chronicler Michael Panaretos, a contemporary of the king, describes him as "a most excellent general."[1] Caucasus after the collapse of the Ilkhanate. Later he was an ally of the khan of the Golden Horde, Tokhtamysh, in his war with Timur (also known as Tamerlane). In late autumn 1386, a huge army of Timur attacked Georgia. Tbilisi was besieged and taken on 21 November 1386, after a fierce fight. The city was pillaged and Bagrat V and his family were imprisoned.[1] Taking advantage of this disaster, the royal vassal Duke Alexander I of Imereti proclaimed himself an independent ruler and was crowned king of Imereti at the Gelati Monastery in 1387. In order to secure his release, Bagrat V agreed to convert from Orthodox Christianity and become Muslim.[2] Timur agreed to free Bagrat and sent him with the troops of 20,000 Mongols[dubious – discuss] back to Georgia. However, with secret aid from Bagrat, his son George completely destroyed[citation needed] a Mongol army and released the king. In the spring of 1387, Timur again invaded Georgia but could not force the Georgians to submission. News of a revolt in Persia and an invasion of Azerbaijan forced Timur to withdraw. In 1389, on the death of Alexander of Imereti, Bagrat was able to reduce his successor to a vassal duke again. He died in 1393, leaving the throne to his son George. Family and children[edit] George VII was Bagrat V's son with his first wife, Helena Megale Komnene, who died in 1366. In June 1367, Bagrat V married Anna Megale Komnene, daughter of Emperor Alexios III of Trebizond and Theodora Kantakouzene at Makriali Church in Lazia.[3] She gave birth to four children: Constantine I David Tamar (subsequently wife of Prince Eles Baratashvili) Olympias (Ulumpia; subsequently wife of Kakhaber Chijavadze, Prince-Chamberlain of Georgia).[citation needed] References[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bagrat V of Georgia. ^ a b Panaretos, ch. 105. Greek text and English translation in Scott Kennedy, Two Works on Trebizond, Dumbarton Oaks Medieval Library 52 (Cambridge: Harvard University, 2019), p. 55 ^ : At the Crossroads of Empires : 14th - 15th Century Eastern Anatolia. Andrew Peacock, Between Georgia and the Islamic World : The Atabegs of Samc'xe and the Turks, Istanbul, p. 55 ^ Panaretos, Chronicle, ch. 87. English translation in Kennedy, Two Works on Trebizond, p. 43 Preceded by David IX King of Georgia 1360–1393 Succeeded by George VII v t e Kings of United Georgia Kingdom of Georgia (1008—1245) Bagrat III George I Bagrat IV George II David IV Demetrius I David V George III Tamar the Great George IV Rusudan Kingdom of Western Georgia (1247—1329) David VI Vakhtang II Constantine I Michael Kingdom of Eastern Georgia (1247—1329) David VII Demetrius II David VIII Vakhtang III George V Reunification (1329–1490) George V David IX Bagrat V George VII Constantine I Alexander I Vakhtang IV George VIII Bagrat VI Alexander II Constantine II Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bagrat_V_of_Georgia&oldid=1056441710" Categories: Kings of Georgia Bagrationi dynasty of the Kingdom of Georgia 1393 deaths Eastern Orthodox monarchs Former Georgian Orthodox Christians Converts to Islam from Eastern Orthodoxy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 Articles needing additional references from November 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Georgian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from November 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Commons category link from Wikidata Year of birth unknown Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Az?rbaycanca Català ?eština Español Français ??????? Hrvatski Italiano ??????? Magyar ???? Nederlands Polski ??????? Türkçe ?????????? Edit links This page was last edited on 21 November 2021, at 20:40 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement