https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Porto_Bello_(1739) Battle of Porto Bello (1739) - Wikipedia Battle of Porto Bello (1739) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Battle during the War of Jenkins' Ear For other battles in the same place, see Battle of Porto Bello. Battle of Porto Bello Part of the War of Jenkins' Ear The bombardment of Porto Bello, by Samuel Scott Date 20 November 1739 Location Portobelo, Panama Result British victory Belligerents  Great Britain Spain Commanders and leaders Edward Vernon Francisco de la Vega Strength 6 ships of the line 2 tenders[1] 700 4 warships[2] Casualties and losses 3 killed 7 wounded[3] 260–300 captured 1 warship destroyed 3 warships captured[3] v t e War of Jenkins' Ear Americas Portobello Fort Mosé St. Augustine Anson expedition Cartagena de Indias 1st Santiago de Cuba Panama Georgia Bloody Marsh Gully Hole Creek La Guaira Puerto Cabello Matina 2nd Santiago de Cuba Havana Brunswick Europe 8 April 1740 Fuerteventura Saint Tropez Mataró and Palamós Cape Sicié Villafranca Glorioso campaign 18 March 1748 Part of the War of the Austrian Succession The Battle of Porto Bello, or the Battle of Portobello, was a 1739 battle between a British naval force aiming to capture the settlement of Portobelo in Panama, and its Spanish defenders. It took place during the War of the Austrian Succession, in the early stages of the war sometimes known as the War of Jenkins' Ear. It resulted in a popularly acclaimed British victory. Contents 1 Background 2 Battle 3 Legacy 4 References 4.1 Citations 4.2 Sources 5 External links Background[edit] The settlement of Portobelo was an important port on the Spanish Main. Following the failure of an earlier British naval blockade to prevent a fully laden treasure fleet sailing to Spain from Porto Bello in 1727, an action in which he had taken part, the then Vice Admiral Edward Vernon repeatedly claimed he could capture it with just six ships.[4] Following his appointment to command the Jamaica Station, Vernon organised an expedition with just six ships, despite criticism that this was far too few. Vernon was a strong advocate of using small squadrons of powerfully armed warships hitting hard and moving fast rather than larger, slower-moving expeditions that were prone to heavy losses through disease.[5] Battle[edit] Vernon's force appeared off Portobelo on 20 November 1739. The British ships entered the bay prepared for a general attack, but a wind coming from the east obliged Vernon to concentrate his ships on the Castillo del Hierro ("Iron Castle"), a harbour fort.[6] The Spanish garrison was caught unprepared. When some Spaniards began to flee from several parts of the fort, several landing parties were sent inshore.[7] The British sailors and marines scaled the walls of the fort, struck the Spanish colours in the lower battery, and hoisted an English ensign. The Spaniards surrendered then at discretion. Of the 300-man Spanish garrison, only 40 soldiers led by Lieutenant Don Juan Francisco Garganta had remained in the fort.[1][7] Once he captured Castillo del Hierro, Vernon shifted his ships against Santiago Fortress, sinking a Spanish sloop and causing other damage.[1] At dawn on the following morning, the Spaniards requested terms.[3] Governor Francisco Javier Martínez de la Vega y Retes surrendered in the afternoon. Portobelo was occupied by the British at the cost of three killed and seven wounded.[3] Three prizes were taken: an armed snow which was renamed Triumph and two coastguards of 20 guns each.[3] The British occupied the town for three weeks, destroying the fortress and other key buildings, and ending the settlement's main function as a major Spanish maritime base, before withdrawing.[5] Legacy[edit] Ruins of the fortress of San Jeronimo, Portobelo. The capture of Porto Bello was welcomed as an exceptionally popular triumph throughout Britain and America, and the name of Portobelo came to be used in commemoration at a variety of locations, such as the Portobello Road in London, the Portobello district of Edinburgh and also in Dublin; as well as Porto Bello in Virginia and Porto Bello in St. Mary's County, Maryland. The victory was particularly well received in the North-American British colonies, where the Spanish had been preying on British shipping.[4] Admiral Vernon became a popular hero, and was himself commemorated in several places, perhaps most famously Mount Vernon, later the estate of George Washington.[8] He was promoted to the rank of admiral.[9] Vernon was a notable opponent of the British government, and in the wake of the victory, as well as prior to the expedition, he was one of the advocates of a more belligerent approach towards Britain's enemies. The British Prime Minister Robert Walpole was placed under great pressure by the Opposition to launch similar raids along the Spanish coast. Vernon's next battle in this campaign, a large-scale invasion of Cartagena in 1741, ended in defeat.[10] References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ a b c Marley p. 252 ^ Beatson pp. 17–18 ^ a b c d e Marley p. 253 ^ a b Simms p. 276 ^ a b Rodgers p. 236 ^ Campbell p. 265 ^ a b Campbell p. 266 ^ Simms pp. 276–77 ^ Pearce p. 403 ^ Victoria, Pablo (2005). El día que España derrotó a Inglaterra : de cómo Blas de Lezo, tuerto, manco y cojo, venció en Cartagena de Indias a la otra "Armada Invencible". Barcelona: Áltera. ISBN 84-89779-68-6. Sources[edit] Campbell, John. Naval history of Great Britain: including the history and lives of the British admirals, Volume 4[permanent dead link]. London, Printed for Baldwyn and Co. (1818). Fernández Duro, Cesáreo. Armada española desde la unión de los reinos de Castilla y de León, tomo VI. Sucesores de Rivadeneyra, 1902. Beatson, Robert. Naval and military memoirs of Great Britain, from 1727 to 1783, Volume 3. London, Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees and Orme (1804). Marley, David. Wars of the Americas: a chronology of armed conflict in the New World, 1492 to the present. ABC-CLIO, 1998. ISBN 978-0-87436-837-6 Nester, William R. The great frontier war: Britain, France, and the imperial struggle for North America, 1607–1755. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2000. ISBN 978-0-275-96772-7 Parker, Matthew. Hell's Gorge: The Battle to Build the Panama Canal. Arrow Books, 2008. Pearce, Edward. The Great Man. Sir Robert Walpole. Pimlico, 2008. Rodger, N. A. M. The Command of the Ocean: A Naval History of Britain, 1649–1815. Penguin Books, 2006. Simms, Brendan. Three Victories and a Defeat: The Rise and Fall of the First British Empire. Penguin Books (2008) External links[edit] Gómez, Santiago: La Guerra de la Oreja de Jenkins. Combates en el Caribe. Antecedentes y primeros enfrentamientos. Revista de Historia Naval (in Spanish) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Battle_of_Porto_Bello_(1739)&oldid=1056157831" Categories: Conflicts in 1739 Naval battles of the War of the Austrian Succession Naval battles involving Great Britain Naval battles involving Spain Battles of the War of Jenkins' Ear 18th century in Central America Military history of Panama 1739 in Central America 1739 in the British Empire 1739 in the Spanish Empire Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2017 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Panama articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Español Français ??? Polski ?????? / srpski Suomi Edit links This page was last edited on 20 November 2021, at 03:02 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Porto_Bello_(1739) Battle of Porto Bello (1739) - Wikipedia Battle of Porto Bello (1739) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Battle during the War of Jenkins' Ear For other battles in the same place, see Battle of Porto Bello. Battle of Porto Bello Part of the War of Jenkins' Ear The bombardment of Porto Bello, by Samuel Scott Date 20 November 1739 Location Portobelo, Panama Result British victory Belligerents  Great Britain Spain Commanders and leaders Edward Vernon Francisco de la Vega Strength 6 ships of the line 2 tenders[1] 700 4 warships[2] Casualties and losses 3 killed 7 wounded[3] 260–300 captured 1 warship destroyed 3 warships captured[3] v t e War of Jenkins' Ear Americas Portobello Fort Mosé St. Augustine Anson expedition Cartagena de Indias 1st Santiago de Cuba Panama Georgia Bloody Marsh Gully Hole Creek La Guaira Puerto Cabello Matina 2nd Santiago de Cuba Havana Brunswick Europe 8 April 1740 Fuerteventura Saint Tropez Mataró and Palamós Cape Sicié Villafranca Glorioso campaign 18 March 1748 Part of the War of the Austrian Succession The Battle of Porto Bello, or the Battle of Portobello, was a 1739 battle between a British naval force aiming to capture the settlement of Portobelo in Panama, and its Spanish defenders. It took place during the War of the Austrian Succession, in the early stages of the war sometimes known as the War of Jenkins' Ear. It resulted in a popularly acclaimed British victory. Contents 1 Background 2 Battle 3 Legacy 4 References 4.1 Citations 4.2 Sources 5 External links Background[edit] The settlement of Portobelo was an important port on the Spanish Main. Following the failure of an earlier British naval blockade to prevent a fully laden treasure fleet sailing to Spain from Porto Bello in 1727, an action in which he had taken part, the then Vice Admiral Edward Vernon repeatedly claimed he could capture it with just six ships.[4] Following his appointment to command the Jamaica Station, Vernon organised an expedition with just six ships, despite criticism that this was far too few. Vernon was a strong advocate of using small squadrons of powerfully armed warships hitting hard and moving fast rather than larger, slower-moving expeditions that were prone to heavy losses through disease.[5] Battle[edit] Vernon's force appeared off Portobelo on 20 November 1739. The British ships entered the bay prepared for a general attack, but a wind coming from the east obliged Vernon to concentrate his ships on the Castillo del Hierro ("Iron Castle"), a harbour fort.[6] The Spanish garrison was caught unprepared. When some Spaniards began to flee from several parts of the fort, several landing parties were sent inshore.[7] The British sailors and marines scaled the walls of the fort, struck the Spanish colours in the lower battery, and hoisted an English ensign. The Spaniards surrendered then at discretion. Of the 300-man Spanish garrison, only 40 soldiers led by Lieutenant Don Juan Francisco Garganta had remained in the fort.[1][7] Once he captured Castillo del Hierro, Vernon shifted his ships against Santiago Fortress, sinking a Spanish sloop and causing other damage.[1] At dawn on the following morning, the Spaniards requested terms.[3] Governor Francisco Javier Martínez de la Vega y Retes surrendered in the afternoon. Portobelo was occupied by the British at the cost of three killed and seven wounded.[3] Three prizes were taken: an armed snow which was renamed Triumph and two coastguards of 20 guns each.[3] The British occupied the town for three weeks, destroying the fortress and other key buildings, and ending the settlement's main function as a major Spanish maritime base, before withdrawing.[5] Legacy[edit] Ruins of the fortress of San Jeronimo, Portobelo. The capture of Porto Bello was welcomed as an exceptionally popular triumph throughout Britain and America, and the name of Portobelo came to be used in commemoration at a variety of locations, such as the Portobello Road in London, the Portobello district of Edinburgh and also in Dublin; as well as Porto Bello in Virginia and Porto Bello in St. Mary's County, Maryland. The victory was particularly well received in the North-American British colonies, where the Spanish had been preying on British shipping.[4] Admiral Vernon became a popular hero, and was himself commemorated in several places, perhaps most famously Mount Vernon, later the estate of George Washington.[8] He was promoted to the rank of admiral.[9] Vernon was a notable opponent of the British government, and in the wake of the victory, as well as prior to the expedition, he was one of the advocates of a more belligerent approach towards Britain's enemies. The British Prime Minister Robert Walpole was placed under great pressure by the Opposition to launch similar raids along the Spanish coast. Vernon's next battle in this campaign, a large-scale invasion of Cartagena in 1741, ended in defeat.[10] References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ a b c Marley p. 252 ^ Beatson pp. 17–18 ^ a b c d e Marley p. 253 ^ a b Simms p. 276 ^ a b Rodgers p. 236 ^ Campbell p. 265 ^ a b Campbell p. 266 ^ Simms pp. 276–77 ^ Pearce p. 403 ^ Victoria, Pablo (2005). El día que España derrotó a Inglaterra : de cómo Blas de Lezo, tuerto, manco y cojo, venció en Cartagena de Indias a la otra "Armada Invencible". Barcelona: Áltera. ISBN 84-89779-68-6. Sources[edit] Campbell, John. Naval history of Great Britain: including the history and lives of the British admirals, Volume 4[permanent dead link]. London, Printed for Baldwyn and Co. (1818). Fernández Duro, Cesáreo. Armada española desde la unión de los reinos de Castilla y de León, tomo VI. Sucesores de Rivadeneyra, 1902. Beatson, Robert. Naval and military memoirs of Great Britain, from 1727 to 1783, Volume 3. London, Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees and Orme (1804). Marley, David. Wars of the Americas: a chronology of armed conflict in the New World, 1492 to the present. ABC-CLIO, 1998. ISBN 978-0-87436-837-6 Nester, William R. The great frontier war: Britain, France, and the imperial struggle for North America, 1607–1755. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2000. ISBN 978-0-275-96772-7 Parker, Matthew. Hell's Gorge: The Battle to Build the Panama Canal. Arrow Books, 2008. Pearce, Edward. The Great Man. Sir Robert Walpole. Pimlico, 2008. Rodger, N. A. M. The Command of the Ocean: A Naval History of Britain, 1649–1815. Penguin Books, 2006. Simms, Brendan. Three Victories and a Defeat: The Rise and Fall of the First British Empire. Penguin Books (2008) External links[edit] Gómez, Santiago: La Guerra de la Oreja de Jenkins. Combates en el Caribe. Antecedentes y primeros enfrentamientos. Revista de Historia Naval (in Spanish) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Battle_of_Porto_Bello_(1739)&oldid=1056157831" Categories: Conflicts in 1739 Naval battles of the War of the Austrian Succession Naval battles involving Great Britain Naval battles involving Spain Battles of the War of Jenkins' Ear 18th century in Central America Military history of Panama 1739 in Central America 1739 in the British Empire 1739 in the Spanish Empire Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2017 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Panama articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Español Français ??? Polski ?????? / srpski Suomi Edit links This page was last edited on 20 November 2021, at 03:02 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement