https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beatriz_Galindo Beatriz Galindo - Wikipedia Beatriz Galindo From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish. (November 2021) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Spanish article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 4,670 articles in the main category, and specifying|topic= will aid in categorization. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:Beatriz Galindo]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|es|Beatriz Galindo}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Beatriz Galindo Beatriz Galindo Born c.?1465 Salamanca, Crown of Castile Died 23 November 1535 (aged around 70) Madrid, Crown of Castile Occupation Educator Beatriz Galindo, sometimes spelled Beatrix and also known as La Latina (c.?1465 – 23 November 1535),[1] was a Spanish Latinist and educator. She was a writer, humanist and a teacher of Queen Isabella of Castile and her children. She was one of the most educated women of her time. There is uncertainty about her date of birth; some authors believe it was 1464 or 1474. The La Latina neighborhood in Madrid is named after her. Contents 1 Life 2 Legacy 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Life[edit] Statue to Beatriz Galindo in Madrid Beatriz Galindo was born in Salamanca, into a family of Zamoran origin in the lower nobility of hidalgos; they had been wealthy but by the time of her birth were almost destitute. Her family chose her among her sisters to become a nun, since she was fond of reading, and they allowed her to take more education in grammar at one of the dependent institutions of University of Salamanca to help her career before taking her vows, but her great skill in Latin set her on an academic career before she was twelve years old. It is likely that she was at one time a student of the great Spanish scholar Antonio de Nebrija.[2] She was nicknamed La Latina for her skill in Latin, and was appointed tutor to the children of Queen Isabella of Castile.[3] She was tutor to five queens altogether: Isabella herself, her daughters Isabella and Maria (both queens of Portugal), Catherine of Aragon, the future wife of Henry VIII of England, and Joanna of Castile, the future wife of Philip of Habsburg and later known as Juana the Mad.[4] She wrote in Latin, producing poetry and a commentary on Aristotle.[4] In December 1491 she married Francisco Ramirez de Madrid.[5] They had two children[6]. She was one of the first women to be active in public life during the renaissance. It is reported that she dressed in the habit of a nun or abbess.[3] She founded the Hospital of the Holy Cross (Santa Cruz de Madrid) in 1506 in Madrid, which still exists.[3] She died in Madrid, aged about 70. Legacy[edit] The neighborhood in Madrid where she once lived is known today as La Latina from her nickname. There are statues of her in Salamanca and Madrid. There is a Beatriz Galindo Secondary School in Madrid. In Salamanca there is an early education and primary school that also takes her name. The novel Falling Pomegranate Seeds: The Duty of Daughters by Wendy J. Dunn is inspired by her story.[7] See also[edit] Francisca de Lebrija Isabella Losa Luisa de Medrano Juliana Morell Notes[edit] ^ Roger Boase (21 June 2017). Secrets of Pinar's Game (2 vols): Court Ladies and Courtly Verse in Fifteenth-Century Spain. BRILL. p. 258. ISBN 978-90-04-33836-4. ^ Spanish Ministry of Education ^ a b c Bailey Ogilvie, Marilyn; Harvey, Joy (2000). The Biographical Dictionary of Women in Science. London: Routledge. p. 481. ISBN 978-0-415-92039-1. ^ a b Women's History at About.com ^ Katharina M. Wilson; M. Wilson (1991). An Encyclopedia of Continental Women Writers. Taylor & Francis. p. 440. ISBN 978-0-8240-8547-6. ^ Bel Bravo, María Antonia. "Humanismo y humanistas" (PDF). Retrieved 11 December 2017. Cite has empty unknown parameters: |urltrad=, |subscription=, and |coauthors= (help); Cite journal requires |journal= (help) ^ Impressions in Ink, (Review) Falling Pomegranate Seeds: The Duty of Daughters, Book One of the Katherine of Aragon Story by Wendy J. Dunn, published 20 January 2021, accessed 26 September 2021 References[edit] The Biographical Dictionary of Women in Science by Marilyn Bailey Ogilvie and Joy Dorothy Harvey, Taylor & Francis, 2000. ISBN 978-0-415-92039-1 The Hidden Giants Women in Science by starlady. Accessed July 2008 Women's History by Jone Johnson Lewis at About.com. Accessed July 2008 Beatriz Galindo-Breve Reseña Biográfica De La Titular Del Centro Spanish Ministry of Education, In Spanish Google translation Accessed July 2008 Arteaga, Almudena de (2007), Beatriz Galindo, The Queens Latin teacher, Algaba editions. ISBN 978-84-96107-89-2. Authority control General ISNI 1 VIAF 1 WorldCat National libraries Spain United States Netherlands Other Faceted Application of Subject Terminology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Beatriz_Galindo&oldid=1056810311" Categories: 1465 births 1534 deaths People from Salamanca 16th-century Latin-language writers Spanish women writers Spanish educators Spanish women educators Women writers (Renaissance) University of Salamanca alumni Spanish Renaissance people Hidden categories: CS1 errors: empty unknown parameters CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles to be expanded from November 2021 All articles to be expanded Articles needing translation from Spanish Wikipedia Use dmy dates from November 2021 Articles with hCards Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with WORLDCATID identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? Asturianu Brezhoneg Català Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego ??????? Italiano ???? Português ??????? Svenska Edit links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 17:56 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beatriz_Galindo Beatriz Galindo - Wikipedia Beatriz Galindo From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish. (November 2021) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Spanish article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 4,670 articles in the main category, and specifying|topic= will aid in categorization. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:Beatriz Galindo]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|es|Beatriz Galindo}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Beatriz Galindo Beatriz Galindo Born c.?1465 Salamanca, Crown of Castile Died 23 November 1535 (aged around 70) Madrid, Crown of Castile Occupation Educator Beatriz Galindo, sometimes spelled Beatrix and also known as La Latina (c.?1465 – 23 November 1535),[1] was a Spanish Latinist and educator. She was a writer, humanist and a teacher of Queen Isabella of Castile and her children. She was one of the most educated women of her time. There is uncertainty about her date of birth; some authors believe it was 1464 or 1474. The La Latina neighborhood in Madrid is named after her. Contents 1 Life 2 Legacy 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Life[edit] Statue to Beatriz Galindo in Madrid Beatriz Galindo was born in Salamanca, into a family of Zamoran origin in the lower nobility of hidalgos; they had been wealthy but by the time of her birth were almost destitute. Her family chose her among her sisters to become a nun, since she was fond of reading, and they allowed her to take more education in grammar at one of the dependent institutions of University of Salamanca to help her career before taking her vows, but her great skill in Latin set her on an academic career before she was twelve years old. It is likely that she was at one time a student of the great Spanish scholar Antonio de Nebrija.[2] She was nicknamed La Latina for her skill in Latin, and was appointed tutor to the children of Queen Isabella of Castile.[3] She was tutor to five queens altogether: Isabella herself, her daughters Isabella and Maria (both queens of Portugal), Catherine of Aragon, the future wife of Henry VIII of England, and Joanna of Castile, the future wife of Philip of Habsburg and later known as Juana the Mad.[4] She wrote in Latin, producing poetry and a commentary on Aristotle.[4] In December 1491 she married Francisco Ramirez de Madrid.[5] They had two children[6]. She was one of the first women to be active in public life during the renaissance. It is reported that she dressed in the habit of a nun or abbess.[3] She founded the Hospital of the Holy Cross (Santa Cruz de Madrid) in 1506 in Madrid, which still exists.[3] She died in Madrid, aged about 70. Legacy[edit] The neighborhood in Madrid where she once lived is known today as La Latina from her nickname. There are statues of her in Salamanca and Madrid. There is a Beatriz Galindo Secondary School in Madrid. In Salamanca there is an early education and primary school that also takes her name. The novel Falling Pomegranate Seeds: The Duty of Daughters by Wendy J. Dunn is inspired by her story.[7] See also[edit] Francisca de Lebrija Isabella Losa Luisa de Medrano Juliana Morell Notes[edit] ^ Roger Boase (21 June 2017). Secrets of Pinar's Game (2 vols): Court Ladies and Courtly Verse in Fifteenth-Century Spain. BRILL. p. 258. ISBN 978-90-04-33836-4. ^ Spanish Ministry of Education ^ a b c Bailey Ogilvie, Marilyn; Harvey, Joy (2000). The Biographical Dictionary of Women in Science. London: Routledge. p. 481. ISBN 978-0-415-92039-1. ^ a b Women's History at About.com ^ Katharina M. Wilson; M. Wilson (1991). An Encyclopedia of Continental Women Writers. Taylor & Francis. p. 440. ISBN 978-0-8240-8547-6. ^ Bel Bravo, María Antonia. "Humanismo y humanistas" (PDF). Retrieved 11 December 2017. Cite has empty unknown parameters: |urltrad=, |subscription=, and |coauthors= (help); Cite journal requires |journal= (help) ^ Impressions in Ink, (Review) Falling Pomegranate Seeds: The Duty of Daughters, Book One of the Katherine of Aragon Story by Wendy J. Dunn, published 20 January 2021, accessed 26 September 2021 References[edit] The Biographical Dictionary of Women in Science by Marilyn Bailey Ogilvie and Joy Dorothy Harvey, Taylor & Francis, 2000. ISBN 978-0-415-92039-1 The Hidden Giants Women in Science by starlady. Accessed July 2008 Women's History by Jone Johnson Lewis at About.com. Accessed July 2008 Beatriz Galindo-Breve Reseña Biográfica De La Titular Del Centro Spanish Ministry of Education, In Spanish Google translation Accessed July 2008 Arteaga, Almudena de (2007), Beatriz Galindo, The Queens Latin teacher, Algaba editions. ISBN 978-84-96107-89-2. Authority control General ISNI 1 VIAF 1 WorldCat National libraries Spain United States Netherlands Other Faceted Application of Subject Terminology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Beatriz_Galindo&oldid=1056810311" Categories: 1465 births 1534 deaths People from Salamanca 16th-century Latin-language writers Spanish women writers Spanish educators Spanish women educators Women writers (Renaissance) University of Salamanca alumni Spanish Renaissance people Hidden categories: CS1 errors: empty unknown parameters CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles to be expanded from November 2021 All articles to be expanded Articles needing translation from Spanish Wikipedia Use dmy dates from November 2021 Articles with hCards Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with WORLDCATID identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? Asturianu Brezhoneg Català Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego ??????? Italiano ???? Português ??????? Svenska Edit links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 17:56 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement