https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disc_jockey Disc jockey - Wikipedia Disc jockey From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Name for person who plays recorded music for an audience "DJ", "DJs", and "Deejay" redirect here. For other uses, see DJ (disambiguation), DJs (disambiguation), and Deejay (disambiguation). Club DJ Robert Hood Radio station DJ in a studio DJ workplace in a nightclub, consisting of three DJ-CD-Players (top), three turntables for vinyl records and a DJ mixer A disc jockey, more commonly abbreviated as DJ, is a person who plays recorded music for an audience. Types of DJs include radio DJs (who host programs on music radio stations), club DJs (who work at a nightclub or music festival), mobile DJs (who are hired to work at public and private events such as weddings, parties, or festivals), and turntablists (who use record players, usually turntables, to manipulate sounds on phonograph records). Originally, the "disc" in "disc jockey" referred to shellac and later vinyl records, but nowadays DJ is used as an all-encompassing term to also describe persons who mix music from other recording media such as cassettes, CDs or digital audio files on a CDJ, controller, or even a laptop. DJs may adopt the title "DJ" in front of their real names, adopted pseudonyms, or stage names.[1] DJs commonly use audio equipment that can play at least two sources of recorded music simultaneously. This enables them to blend tracks together to create seamless transitions between recordings and develop unique mixes of songs. This can involve aligning the beats of the music sources so their rhythms and tempos do not clash when played together and to enable a smooth transition from one song to another. DJs often use specialized DJ mixers, small audio mixers with crossfader and cue functions to blend or transition from one song to another. Mixers are also used to pre-listen to sources of recorded music in headphones and adjust upcoming tracks to mix with currently playing music. DJ software can be used with a DJ controller device to mix audio files on a computer instead of a console mixer. DJs may also use a microphone to speak to the audience; effects units such as reverb to create sound effects and electronic musical instruments such as drum machines and synthesizers. Contents 1 Role 2 Types 2.1 Club DJs 2.2 Hip hop DJs 2.3 Radio DJs 2.4 Dancehall/reggae deejays 2.5 Turntablists 2.6 Residents 2.7 Other types 3 Equipment 3.1 Turntables 3.2 CDJs/media players 3.3 DJ mixers 3.4 Headphones 3.5 Software 3.6 Timecode 3.7 DJ controllers 3.8 Other equipment 4 Techniques 4.1 Miming 5 History 6 Female DJs 7 Health 8 In film 9 See also 10 References 11 Notes 12 External links Role[edit] Originally, the word "disc" in "disc jockey" referred to gramophone records, but now "DJ" is used as an all-encompassing term to describe someone who mixes recorded music from any source, including vinyl records, cassettes, CDs, or digital audio files stored on USB stick or laptop. DJs typically perform for a live audience in a nightclub or dance club or a TV, radio broadcast audience, or an online radio audience. DJs also create mixes, remixes and tracks that are recorded for later sale and distribution. In hip hop music, DJs may create beats, using percussion breaks, basslines and other musical content sampled from pre-existing records. In hip hop, rappers and MCs use these beats to rap over. Some DJs adopt the title "DJ" as part of their names (e.g., DJ Jazzy Jeff, DJ Qbert, DJ Shadow and DJ Yoda). Professional DJs often specialize in a specific genre of music, such as techno, house or hip hop music. DJs typically have an extensive knowledge about the music they specialize in. Many DJs are avid music collectors of vintage, rare or obscure tracks and records. Types[edit] Club DJs[edit] DJ Pete Rock performing at Rahzel and Friends – Brooklyn Bowl, 2016 Club DJs, commonly referred as DJs in general, play music at musical events, such as parties at music venues or bars, music festivals, corporate and private events. Typically, club DJs mix music recordings from two or more sources using different mixing techniques to produce non-stopping flow of music. One key technique used for seamlessly transitioning from one song to another is beatmatching. A DJ who mostly plays and mixes one specific music genre is often given the title of that genre; for example, a DJ who plays hip hop music is called a hip hop DJ, a DJ who plays house music is a house DJ, a DJ who plays techno is called a techno DJ, and so on. The quality of a DJ performance (often called a DJ mix or DJ set) consists of two main features: technical skills, or how well the DJ can operate the equipment and produce smooth transitions between two or more recordings and a playlist; and the ability of a DJ to select the most suitable recordings, also known as "reading the crowd".[2] Hip hop DJs[edit] DJ Kool Herc, Grandmaster Flash, and Afrika Bambaataa were members of a block party at South Bronx. Kool Herc played records such as James Brown's "Give It Up or Turnit a Loose", Jimmy Castor's "It's Just Begun" and Booker T. & the M.G.'s' "Melting Pot".[3] Herc played Incredible Bong Band "Bongo rock", "Apach", and UK rock band Babe Ruth "The Mexican" also. With Bronx clubs struggling with street gangs, uptown DJs catering to an older disco crowd with different aspirations, and commercial radio also catering to a demographic distinct from teenagers in the Bronx, Herc's parties had a ready-made audience.[4][5][6] DJ Kool Herc developed the style that was the blueprint for hip hop music. Herc used the record to focus on a short, heavily percussive part in it: the "break". Since this part of the record was the one the dancers liked best, Herc isolated the break and prolonged it by changing between two record players. As one record reached the end of the break, he cued a second record back to the beginning of the break, which allowed him to extend a relatively short section of music into "five-minute loop of fury".[7] This innovation had its roots in what Herc called "The Merry-Go-Round," a technique by which the deejay switched from break to break at the height of the party. This technique is specifically called "The Merry-Go-Round" because according to Herc, it takes one "back and forth with no slack."[8] Radio DJs[edit] Main article: Radio personality Radio DJs or radio personalities introduce and play music broadcast on AM, FM, digital or Internet radio stations. Dancehall/reggae deejays[edit] Main article: Toasting (Jamaican music) In Jamaican music, a deejay (DJ) is a reggae or dancehall musician who sings and "toasts" (raps) to an instrumental riddim. Deejays are not to be confused with DJs from other music genres like hip hop, where they select and play music. Dancehall/reggae DJs who select riddims to play are called selectors. Deejays whose style is nearer to singing are sometimes called singjays. The term deejay originated in the 1960s and 1970s when performers such as U-Roy or King Stitt toasted over the instrumental (dub music) versions of popular records. These versions were often released on the flip side to the song's 45 record. This gave the deejays the chance to create on-the-fly lyrics to the music. Big Youth, and I Roy were famous deejays in Jamaica. Turntablists[edit] Main article: Turntablism Play media DJ Qbert performing in Rainbow Warehouse in Birmingham (video with close-up photography at the DJ mixer, though without sound) Turntablists, also called battle DJs, use turntables and DJ mixer to manipulate recorded sounds to produce new music. In essence, they use DJ equipment as a musical instrument. Perhaps the best known turntablist technique is scratching. Turntablists often participate in DJ contests like DMC World DJ Championships and Red Bull 3Style.[9] Residents[edit] Main article: Resident DJ A resident DJ performs at a venue on a regular basis or permanently.[10][11][12] They would perform regularly (typically under an agreement) in a particular discotheque, a particular club, a particular event, or a particular broadcasting station.[13][14][15] Residents have a decisive influence on the club or a series of events.[16] Per agreement with the management or company, the DJ would have to perform under agreed times and dates.[11][17] Typically, DJs perform as residents for two or three times in a week, for example, on Friday and Saturday. DJs who make a steady income from a venue are also considered resident DJs.[18][19] Examples for resident DJs are:[20][21] Alfredo Fiorito, Richie Hawtin, Sven Väth — Amnesia, Ibiza, Spain Martin Garrix — Hï Ibiza, Ibiza, Spain Larry Levan — Paradise Garage, New York City, USA David Mancuso — The Loft, New York City Tiësto, Deadmau5, Calvin Harris — Hakkasan, Las Vegas, USA Kaskade — Encore Beach Club, Las Vegas, USA Dom Chung — UK Ben Klock, Marcel Dettmann, Tama Sumo — Berghain, Berlin, Germany Fish Go Deep — Cork, Ireland Djsky — Ghana, West Africa Other types[edit] Mobile DJs — DJs with their own portable audio sound systems who specialize in performing at gatherings such as block parties, street fairs, taverns, weddings, birthdays, school and corporate events. Mobile DJs may also offer lighting packages and video systems.[22] Producer DJs — DJs who create remixes of popular club hits, completely original tracks, or transition friendly versions of tracks which extend the start and end of a song. Producer DJ often have their work featured on online DJ record pools.[23] DJanes — a term describing female DJs used in countries such as Germany that employ grammatical gender in their languages.[24] Celebrity DJs — widely known celebrities performing as DJs.[25] Bedroom DJs — a general term for DJs performing at home, usually recording their sets and posting them online.[26] Equipment[edit] DJs use equipment that enables them to play multiple sources of recorded music and mix them to create seamless transitions and unique arrangements of songs. An important tool for DJs is the specialized DJ mixer, a small audio mixer with a crossfader and cue functions. The crossfader enables the DJ to blend or transition from one song to another. The cue knobs or switches allow the DJ to "listen" to a source of recorded music in headphones before playing it for the live club or broadcast audience. Previewing the music in headphones helps the DJ pick the next track they want to play, cue up the track to the desired starting location, and align the two tracks' beats in traditional situations where auto sync technology is not being used. This process ensures that the selected song will mix well with the currently playing music. DJs may align the beats of the music sources so their rhythms do not clash when they are played together to help create a smooth transition from one song to another. Other equipment may include a microphone, effects units such as reverb, and electronic musical instruments such as drum machines and synthesizers. As music technology has progressed, DJs have adopted different types of equipment to play and mix music, all of which are still commonly used. Traditionally, DJs used two turntables plugged into a DJ mixer to mix music on vinyl records. As compact discs became popular media for publishing music, specialized high quality CD players known as CDJs were developed for DJs. CDJs can take the place of turntables or be used together with turntables. Many CDJs can now play digital music files from USB flash drives or SD cards in addition to CDs. With the spread of portable laptop, tablet, and smartphone computers, DJs began using software together with specialized sound cards and DJ controller hardware. DJ software can be used in conjunction with a hardware DJ mixer or be used instead of a hardware mixer. Turntables[edit] Main article: Turntablism DJ Spooky at the Sundance Film Festival in 2003, using two Technics SL-1200 turntables and a DJ mixer Turntables allow DJs to play vinyl records. By adjusting the playback speed of the turntable, either by adjusting the speed knob, or by manipulating the platter (e.g., by slowing down the platter by putting a finger gently along the side), DJs can match the tempos of different records so their rhythms can be played together at the same time without clashing or make a smooth, seamless transition from one song to another. This technique is known as beatmatching. DJs typically replace the rubber mat on turntables that keeps the record moving in sync with the turntable with a slipmat that facilitates manipulating the playback of the record by hand. With the slipmat, the DJ can stop or slow down the record while the turntable is still spinning. Direct-drive turntables are the type preferred by DJs. Belt-drive turntables are less expensive, but they are not suitable for turntablism and DJing, because the belt-drive motor can be damaged by this type of manipulation. Some DJs, most commonly those who play hip hop music, go beyond merely mixing records and use turntables as musical instruments for scratching, beat juggling, and other turntablism techniques. CDJs/media players[edit] Main article: CDJ CDJs / media players are high quality digital media players made for DJing. They often have large jog wheels and pitch controls to allow DJs to manipulate the playback of digital files for beatmatching similar to how DJs manipulate vinyl records on turntables. CDJs often have features such as loops and waveform displays similar to DJ software. Originally designed to play music from compact discs, they now can play digital music files stored on USB flash drives and SD cards. Some CDJs can also connect to a computer running DJ software to act as a DJ controller. Modern media players have the ability to stream music from online music providers such as Beatport, Beatsource, Tidal and Soundcloud GO.[27] DJ mixers[edit] Main article: DJ mixer A Numark DM2002X Pro Master DJ mixer. This three channel mixer can have up to three input sound sources. The gain control knobs and equalization control knobs allow the volume and tone of each sound source to be adjusted. The vertical faders allow for further adjustment of the volume of each sound source. The horizontally-mounted crossfader enables the DJ to smoothly transition from a song on one sound source to a song from a different sound source. DJ mixers are small audio mixing consoles specialized for DJing. Most DJ mixers have far fewer channels than a mixer used by a record producer or audio engineer; whereas standard live sound mixers in small venues have 12 to 24 channels, and standard recording studio mixers have even more (as many as 72 on large boards), basic DJ mixers may have only two channels. While DJ mixers have many of the same features found on larger mixers (faders, equalization knobs, gain knobs, effects units, etc.), DJ mixers have a feature that is usually only found on DJ mixers: the crossfader. The crossfader is a type of fader that is mounted horizontally. DJs used the crossfader to mix two or more sound sources. The midpoint of the crossfader's travel is a 50/50 mix of the two channels (on a two channel mixer). The far left side of the crossfader provides only the channel A sound source. The far right side provides only the channel B sound source (e.g., record player number 2). Positions in between the two extremes provide different mixes of the two channels. Some DJs use a computer with DJ software and a DJ controller instead of an analog DJ mixer to mix music, although DJ software can be used in conjunction with a hardware DJ mixer. Headphones[edit] Main article: Headphones DJs generally use higher quality headphones than those designed for music consumers. DJ headphones have other properties useful for DJs, such as designs that acoustically isolate the sounds of the headphones from the outside environment (hard shell headphones), flexible headbands and pivot joints to allow DJs to listen to one side of the headphones, while turning the other headphone away (so they can monitor the mix in the club), and replaceable cables. Replaceable cables enables DJs to buy new cables if a cable becomes frayed, worn, or damaged, or if a cable is accidentally cut. Closed-back headphones are highly recommended for DJs to block outside noise as the environment of DJ usually tend to be very noisy. Standard headphones have 3.5mm jack but DJ equipment usually requires ¼ inch jack. Most of specialized DJ Headphones have an adapter to switch between 3.5mm jack and ¼ inch jack. Detachable coiled cables are perfect for DJ Headphones.[28] Software[edit] It has been suggested that this article be split into a new article titled DJ software. (Discuss) (May 2020) See also: List of music software § DJ software A screenshot of Mixxx DJ software running on Mac OS X DJs have changed their equipment as new technologies are introduced. The earliest DJs in pop music, in 1970s discos, used record turntables, vinyl records and audio consoles. In the 1970s, DJs would have to lug heavy direct drive turntables and crates of records to clubs and shows. In the 1980s, many DJs transitioned to compact cassettes. In the 1990s and 2000s, many DJs switched to using digital audio such as CDs and MP3 files. As technological advances made it practical to store large collections of digital music files on a laptop computer, DJ software was developed so DJs could use a laptop as a source of music instead of transporting CDs or vinyl records to gigs. Unlike most music player software designed for regular consumers, DJ software can play at least two audio files simultaneously, display the waveforms of the files on screen and enable the DJ to listen to either source. The waveforms allow the DJ see what is coming next in the music and how the playback of different files is aligned. The software analyzes music files to identify their tempo and where the beats are. The analyzed information can be used by the DJ to help manually beatmatch like with vinyl records or the software can automatically synchronize the beats. Digital signal processing algorithms in software allow DJs to adjust the tempo of recordings independently of their pitch (and musical key, a feature known as "keylock". Some software analyzes the loudness of the music for automatic normalization with ReplayGain and detects the musical key. Additionally, DJ software can store cue points, set loops, and apply effects. As tablet computers and smartphones became widespread, DJ software was written to run on these devices in addition to laptops. DJ software requires specialized hardware in addition to a computer to fully take advantage of its features. The consumer grade, regular sound card integrated into most computer motherboards can only output two channels (one stereo pair). However, DJs need to be able to output at least four channels (two stereo pairs, thus Left and Right for input 1 and Left and Right for input 2), either unmixed signals to send to a DJ mixer or a main output plus a headphone output. Additionally, DJ sound cards output higher quality signals than the sound cards built into consumer-grade computer motherboards. Timecode[edit] Special vinyl records (or CDs/digital files played with CDJs) can be used with DJ software to play digital music files with DJ software as if they were pressed onto vinyl, allowing turntablism techniques to be used with digital files. These vinyl records do not have music recordings pressed on to them. Instead, they are pressed with a special signal, referred to as "timecode", to control DJ software. The DJ software interprets changes in the playback speed, direction, and position of the timecode signal and manipulates the digital files it is playing in the same way that the turntable manipulates the timecode record. This requires a specialized DJ sound card with at least 4 channels (2 stereo pairs) of inputs and outputs. With this setup, the DJ software typically outputs unmixed signals from the music files to an external hardware DJ mixer. Some DJ mixers have integrated USB sound cards that allow DJ software to connect directly to the mixer without requiring a separate sound card. DJ controllers[edit] Main article: DJ controller A DJ software can be used to mix audio files on the computer instead of a separate hardware mixer. When mixing on a computer, DJs often use a DJ controller device that mimics the layout of two turntables plus a DJ mixer to control the software rather than the computer keyboard & touchpad on a laptop, or the touchscreen on a tablet computer or smartphone. Many DJ controllers have an integrated sound card with 4 output channels (2 stereo pairs) that allows the DJ to use headphones to preview music before playing it on the main output.[29] Other equipment[edit] A microphone, so that the DJ can introduce songs and speak to the audience over the sound system. Electronic effects units such as delay, reverb, octave, equalizer, chorus, etc. Multi-stylus head shells, which allow a DJ to play different grooves of the same record at the same time. Samplers, sequencers, electronic musical keyboards (synthesizers), effects pedals (effects unit) or drum machines. PA system or sound reinforcement system (power amplifiers and speaker enclosures), typically including subwoofer cabinets for deep bass (or, if a DJ is broadcasting and/or recording a set, broadcasting equipment or recording gear) Monitor speakers, for listening to the "house mix" that is playing over the main speakers Techniques[edit] In the early 1970s in the South Bronx, a young teen DJ called Grand Wizzard Theodore invented the "DJ scratch" technique. Other DJs, like Grandmaster Flash, took the technique to higher levels to the familiar sound and technique we hear today. Several techniques are used by DJs as a means to better mix and blend recorded music. These techniques primarily include the cueing, equalization and audio mixing of two or more sound sources. The complexity and frequency of special techniques depends largely on the setting in which a DJ is working. Radio DJs are less likely to focus on advanced music-mixing procedures than club DJs, who rely on a smooth transition between songs using a range of techniques. However, some radio DJs are experienced club DJs, so they use the same sophisticated mixing techniques. Club DJ turntable techniques include beatmatching, phrasing and slip-cueing to preserve energy on a dance floor. Turntablism embodies the art of cutting, beat juggling, scratching, needle drops, phase shifting, back spinning and more to perform the transitions and overdubs of samples in a more creative manner (although turntablism is often considered a use of the turntable as a musical instrument rather than a tool for blending recorded music). Professional DJs may use harmonic mixing to choose songs that are in compatible musical keys.[30][31] Other techniques include chopping, screwing and looping. Recent advances in technology in both DJ hardware and software can provide assisted or automatic completion of some traditional DJ techniques and skills. Examples include phrasing and beatmatching, which can be partially or completely automated by using DJ software that performs automatic synchronization of sound recordings, a feature commonly labelled "sync". Most DJ mixers now include a beat-counter which analyzes the tempo of an incoming sound source and displays its tempo in beats per minute (BPM), which may assist with beatmatching analog sound sources. In the past, being a DJ has largely been a self-taught craft but with the complexities of new technologies and the convergence with music production methods, there are a growing number of schools and organizations that offer instruction on the techniques.[32] Miming[edit] In DJ culture, miming refers to the practice of DJ's pantomiming the actions of live-mixing a set on stage while a pre-recorded mix plays over the sound system.[33][34] Miming mixing in a live performance is considered to be controversial within DJ culture.[35] Some within the DJ community say that miming is increasingly used as a technique by celebrity model DJs who may lack mixing skills, but can draw big crowds to a venue.[36] During a DJ tour for the release of the French group Justice's A Cross the Universe in November 2008, controversy arose when a photograph of Augé DJing with an unplugged Akai MPD24 surfaced. The photograph sparked accusations that Justice's live sets were faked. Augé has since said that the equipment was unplugged very briefly before being reattached and the band put a three-photo set of the incident on their MySpace page.[37][38] After a 2013 Disclosure concert, the duo was criticized for pretending to live mix to a playback of a pre-recorded track. Disclosure's Guy Lawrence said they did not deliberately intend to mislead their audience, and cited miming by other DJs such as David Guetta.[39] History[edit] For the history of club DJs, see History of DJing. For the history of radio DJs, see History of radio disc jockeys. The term "disc jockey" was ostensibly coined by radio gossip commentator Walter Winchell in 1935, and the phrase first appeared in print in a 1941 Variety magazine, used to describe radio personalities who introduced phonograph records on the air.[40][41] Playing recorded music for dancing and parties rose with the mass marketing of home phonographs in the late 19th century. British radio disc jockey Jimmy Savile hosted his first live dance party in 1943 using a single turntable and a makeshift sound system. Four years later, Savile began using two turntables welded together to form a single DJ console.[42] In 1947, the Whiskey A Go-Go opened in Paris as the first discotheque.[43] In the 1960s, Rudy Bozak began making the first DJ mixers, mixing consoles specialized for DJing. In the late 1960s to early 1970s Jamaican sound system culture, producer and sound system operator (DJ), (Jamaican) King Tubby and producer Lee "Scratch" Perry were pioneers of the genre known as dub music.[44][45] They experimented with tape-based composition; emphasized repetitive rhythmic structures (often stripped of their harmonic elements); electronically manipulated spatiality; sonically manipulated pre-recorded musical materials from mass media;[44] and remixed music among other innovative techniques.[45] It is widely known that the Jamaican dancehall culture has had and continues to have a significant impact on the American hip hop culture.[44][45] Vintage DJ Station. A DJ mixer is placed between the two turntables. Pioneer DDJ-RX controller running with rekordbox on a computer DJ turntablism has origins in the invention of direct-drive turntables. Early belt-drive turntables were unsuitable for turntablism and mixing, since they had a slow start-up time, and they were prone to wear-and-tear and breakage, as the belt would break from backspinning or scratching.[46] The first direct-drive turntable was invented by engineer Shuichi Obata at Matsushita (now Panasonic),[47] based in Osaka, Japan.[48] It eliminated belts, and instead employed a motor to directly drive a platter on which a vinyl record rests.[49] In 1969, Matsushita released it as the SP-10,[49] the first direct-drive turntable on the market,[50] and the first in their influential Technics series of turntables.[49] In 1972, Technics started making their SL-1200 turntable, featuring high torque direct drive design.[51] The SL-1200 had a rapid start and its durable direct drive enabled DJs to manipulate the platter, as with scratching techniques. Hip hop DJs began using the Technics SL-1200s as musical instruments to manipulate records with turntablism techniques such as scratching and beat juggling rather than merely mixing records. These techniques were developed in the 1970s by DJ Kool Herc, Grand Wizard Theodore, and Afrika Bambaataa, as they experimented with Technics direct-drive decks, finding that the motor would continue to spin at the correct RPM even if the DJ wiggled the record back and forth on the platter.[51] In 1980, Japanese company Roland released the TR-808, an analog rhythm/drum machine, which has unique artificial sounds, such as its booming bass and sharp snare, and a metronome-like rhythm. Yellow Magic Orchestra's use of the instrument in 1980 influenced hip hop pioneer Afrika Bambaataa, after which the TR-808 would be widely adopted by hip hop DJs, with 808 sounds remaining central to hip-hop music ever since.[52][53] The Roland TB-303, a bass synthesizer released in 1981, had a similar impact on electronic dance music genres such as techno and house music,[54][52] along with Roland's TR-808[53] and TR-909 drum machines.[55][56] In 1982, the Compact Disc (CD) format was released, popularizing digital audio. In 1998, the first MP3 digital audio player, the Eiger Labs MPMan F10, was introduced. In January of that same year at the BeOS Developer Conference, N2IT demonstrated FinalScratch, the first digital DJ system to allow DJs control of MP3 files through special time-coded vinyl records or CDs.[57] While it would take some time for this novel concept to catch on with the "die-hard Vinyl DJs," this would become the first step in the Digital DJ revolution. Manufacturers joined with computer DJing pioneers to offer professional endorsements, the first being Professor Jam (a.k.a. William P. Rader), who went on to develop the industry's first dedicated computer DJ convention and learning program, the "CPS (Computerized Performance System) DJ Summit", to help spread the word about the advantages of this emerging technology. In 2001, Pioneer DJ began producing the CDJ-1000 CD player, making the use of digital music recordings with traditional DJ techniques practical for the first time. As the 2000s progressed, laptop computers became more powerful and affordable. DJ software, specialized DJ sound cards, and DJ controllers were developed for DJs to use laptops as a source of music rather than turntables or CDJs. In the 2010s, like laptops before them, tablet computers and smartphones became more powerful & affordable. DJ software was written to run on these more portable devices instead of laptops, although laptops remain the more common type of computer for DJing. Female DJs[edit] In Western popular music, women musicians have achieved great success in singing and songwriting roles, however, there are relatively few women DJs or turntablists. Part of this may stem from a general low percentage of women in audio technology-related jobs. A 2013 Sound on Sound article stated that there are "...few women in record production and sound engineering."[58] Ncube states that "[n]inety-five percent of music producers are male, and although there are female producers achieving great things in music, they are less well-known than their male counterparts."[58] The vast majority of students in music technology programs are male. In hip hop music, the low percentage of women DJs and turntablists may stem from the overall male domination of the entire hip hop music industry. Most of the top rappers, MCs, DJs, record producers and music executives are men. There are a small number of high-profile women, but they are rare. In 2007 Mark Katz's article "Men, Women, and Turntables: Gender and the DJ Battle," stated that "very few women [do turntablism] battle[s]; the matter has been a topic of conversation among hip-hop DJs for years."[59] In 2010 Rebekah Farrugia states "the male-centricity of EDM culture" contributes to "a marginalisation of women in these [EDM] spaces."[60] While turntablism and broader DJ practices should not be conflated, Katz suggests use or lack of use of the turntable broadly by women across genres and disciplines is impacted upon by what he defines as "male technophilia."[59] Historian Ruth Oldenziel concurs in her writing on engineering with this idea of socialization as a central factor in the lack of engagement with technology. She explains: "an exclusive focus on women's supposed failure to enter the field … is insufficient for understanding how our stereotypical notions have come into being; it tends to put the burden of proof entirely on women and to blame them for their supposedly inadequate socialization, their lack of aspiration, and their want of masculine values. An equally challenging question is why and how boys have come to love things technical, how boys have historically been socialized as technophiles."[61] French electronic music producer and DJ Miss Kittin Lucy Green has focused on gender in relation to musical performers and creators, and specifically on educational frameworks as they relate to both.[62] She suggests that women's alienation from "areas that have a strong technological tendency such as DJing, sound engineering and producing" are "not necessarily about her dislike of these instruments but relates to the interrupting effect of their dominantly masculine delineations."[63] Despite this, women and girls do increasingly engage in turntable and DJ practices, individually[64] and collectively,[65] and "carve out spaces for themselves in EDM and DJ Culture".[60] A 2015 article cited a number of prominent female DJs: Hannah Wants, Ellen Allien, Miss Kittin, Monika Kruse, Nicole Moudaber, B.Traits, Magda, Nina Kraviz, Nervo, and Annie Mac.[66] Two years later, another article brings out a list with world-famous female DJs including Nastia, tINY, Nora En Pure, Anja Schneider, Peggy Gou, Maya Jane Coles, and Eli & Fur.[67] Female DJ The Black Madonna has been called "one of the world’s most exciting turntablists."[68] Her stage name The Black Madonna is a tribute to her mother's favorite Catholic saint.[69] In 2018, The Black Madonna played herself as an in-residence DJ for the video game Grand Theft Auto Online, as part of the After Hours DLC.[70] There are various projects dedicated to the promotion and support of these practices such as Female DJs London.[71] Some artists and collectives go beyond these practices to be more gender inclusive.[72] For example, Discwoman, a New York-based collective and booking agency, describe themselves as "representing and showcasing cis women, trans women and genderqueer talent."[73] In Japan, the newest Bushiroad franchise: D4DJ focuses all-female DJ unit. Health[edit] Main article: Health problems of musicians The risk of DJ's working in nightclubs with loud music includes noise-induced hearing loss and tinnitus.[74] Nightclubs constantly exceed safe levels of noise exposure with average sound levels ranging from 93.2 to 109.7 dB.[75] Constant music exposure creates temporary and permanent auditory dysfunction for professional DJ's with average levels at 96dB being above the recommended level, at which ear protection is mandatory for industry. Three quarters of DJ's have tinnitus[76] and are at risk of tenosynovitis in the wrists and other limbs. Tenosynovitis results from staying in the same position over multiple gigs for scratching motion and cueing, this would be related to a repetitive strain injury.[77] Gigs can last 4-5 hours in nightlife and the hospitality industry, as a result there are potential complications of prolonged standing which include slouching, varicose veins, cardiovascular disorders, joint compression, and muscle fatigue.[78][79] This is common for other staff to experience as well including bartenders and security staff for example. In film[edit] Berlin Calling – a German film about fictional DJ and producer Ickarus (Paul Kalkbrenner), who is struggling with drug abuse Speaking in Code – an American documentary film about techno artists Modeselektor, Wighnomy Brothers, Philip Sherburne, Monolake and David Day Kvadrat – a French and Russian documentary film about the realities of techno DJing, using the example of DJ Andrey Pushkarev It's All Gone Pete Tong – a fictional mockumentary British movie about Frankie Wilde, a DJ who gradually becomes deaf due to drug abuse and an unhealthy lifestyle We Are Your Friends – an American fiction film about a college DJ trying to make it in the DJing scene with "one hit song", starring Zac Efron Scratch – a documentary about the hip-hop DJ and the 2000-era turntablist movement Tonkatsu DJ Agetarou – a Japanese anime, originally a manga, about a fictional character named Agetarou who aspires to be a DJ master with the help of his friends and mentor, Big Master Fry. 24 Hour Party People – about the UK music scene from the late 1970s to the "Madchester" scene of the late 1980s and early 1990s. Human Traffic – about early UK rave counter-culture featuring music and performances by celebrated DJs Fatboy Slim, CJ Bolland, Carl Cox, and Mad Doctor X. Turn Up Charlie – a 2019 series about a struggling DJ, played by Idris Elba, who is also a bachelor trying to make it again after a one hit back in the 1990s Avicii: True Stories – a documentary film about Avicii See also[edit] Digital DJ licensing List of club DJs List of music software#DJ software Live PA DJ mix Record collecting Spelling of disc Stage lighting VJ (media personality) References[edit] ^ "What is a DJ?". We Are Crossfader - Learn How To DJ Online. 12 August 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2021. ^ How To Read A Crowd (And What Happens If You Don’t), Digital DJ Tips, 3 November 2017 ^ Shapiro, pp. 212–213. ^ Shapiro, Peter. Rough Guide to Hip-Hop, 2nd. ed., London: Rough Guides, 2005 ISBN 978-1-84353-263-7. pp.212–213. ^ Toop, David. Rap Attack, 3rd. ed., London: Serpent's Tail, 2000 ISBN 978-1-85242-627-9 p.65. ^ Ogg, Alex, with Upshall, David. The Hip Hop Years, London: Macmillan, 1999 ISBN 978-0-7522-1780-2 p.18. ^ Chang, Jeff. Can't Stop Won't Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop Generation. St. Martin's Press, New York: 2005. ISBN 978-0-312-42579-1 p. 79. ^ falkmanbeatz -break bboy / bgirl channel- (8 January 2014), The Freshest Kids: The History of the B-Boy (Full Documentary), archived from the original on 21 April 2014, retrieved 26 April 2017 ^ Red Bull 3Style ^ Thorp, John (7 January 2014). "Resident DJs Are The Heroes Of Clubbing, And We Need To Show Them Love | Thump". Thump. Vice. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ a b Celikbas, Murat (1 October 2013). "What Is "Being A Resident DJ" ? |". Digital DJ INFO. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ "The Do's and Don'ts of Being a Weekly Resident DJ". Complex. 14 November 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ "DARIUS SYROSSIAN (BEST RESIDENT DJ)". DJMag.com. 18 December 2014. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ "Resident DJ Mednas Dishes On Miami LIV-ing". Vibe. 19 April 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ Ncube, Dumisani. "The Monitor :: Variety Of Talent At Next Big EDM DJ". The Monitor. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ Frankland, Becca (7 February 2017). "mUmU Liverpool 9th birthday review". Skiddle.com. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ Robinson, Tyler (9 March 2016). "How to Become the Resident Dj At Your Local Nightclub". www.magneticmag.com. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ Golden, Ean (16 April 2015). "How to Get a DJ Residency". DJ TechTools. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ "5 clubs you need to visit before you die". www.redbull.com. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ "Top 10 Resident DJs of all Time". DJBroadcast. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ "10 Resident DJs Who Changed EDM". Billboard. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ Stacy Zemon (24 July 2013). The Mobile DJ Handbook: How to Start & Run a Profitable Mobile Disc Jockey Service. Taylor & Francis. pp. 6–. ISBN 978-1-136-11734-3. ^ "How to DJ: How to Become a DJ, Start a Business, and Make Money". DJ Play It. 9 April 2019. Retrieved 12 April 2019. ^ Mark J. Butler (2014). Playing with Something that Runs: Technology, Improvisation, and Composition in DJ and Laptop Performance. Oxford University Press. pp. 111–. ISBN 978-0-19-539362-0. ^ Shaquille O'Neal had a blast performing at an electronic music festival as 'DJ Diesel', USA Today Sports, 25 July 2016 ^ Minieri, Nick (12 November 2012). "Bedroom DJ Woes: Why You're Not Getting Booked (And What To Do About It)". DJ Tech Tools. DJ TechTools. Retrieved 25 January 2018. ^ "Denon DJ SC6000, SC6000M & X1850 First Look - We Are Crossfader". We Are Crossfader - Learn How To DJ Online. 9 January 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2021. ^ GetAHeadphone (2016), Best DJ Headphones, retrieved 27 October 2016 ^ Steventon, John, 1975– (3 December 2014). DJing for dummies (3rd ed.). Chichester, West Sussex. ISBN 9781118937280. OCLC 888464041.CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ "Harmonic mixing: The Basics". Retrieved 29 December 2013. ^ "DJ Mixes Remixes". Retrieved 29 December 2013. ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 15 August 2014. Retrieved 8 April 2014.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ Wendy Fonarow. Empire of Dirt: The Aesthetics and Rituals of British Indie Music. Wesleyan University Press; 10 July 2006. ISBN 978-0-8195-6811-3. p. 270–. ^ Charles Kriel. How to DVJ: A Digital DJ Masterclass. CRC Press; 25 January 2013. ISBN 978-1-136-12270-5. p. 106–. ^ Heath, Harold. "Crimes against DJing. What's the single worst sin a DJ can commit?". International DJ Magazine. International DJ Magazine. Retrieved 1 July 2017. ^ Calvano, Jordan (11 May 2015). "This is the most fake DJ set you have ever seen". www.magneticmag.com. Magnetic Magazine. Retrieved 30 June 2017. ^ "Justice Unplugged". URB. 18 November 2008. Archived from the original on 19 December 2008. Retrieved 19 December 2008. ^ "Justice fake DJ set – (false) panic in technoland". Side-Line Magazine. 28 November 2008. Archived from the original on 14 February 2013. Retrieved 1 September 2017. ^ Payne, Chris (10 June 2013). "Disclosure Explains Their Unplugged Miming Performance in London". Billboard.com. Billboard. Retrieved 1 July 2017. ^ Rohter, Larry (16 August 2010). "Museum Acquires Storied Trove of Performances by Jazz Greats". New York Times. Retrieved 30 October 2010. ^ "OED Appeals". oed.com. Oxford English Dictionary. Retrieved 19 September 2016. ^ Luke Crisell; Phil White; Rob Principe (14 April 2009). On the Record: The Scratch DJ Academy Guide. St. Martin's Publishing Group. pp. 23–. ISBN 978-1-4299-6623-8. ^ "So You Want To Be A DJ? History". UF Interactive Media Lab. University of Florida. Retrieved 19 September 2016. ^ a b c Michael Veal (2013), Dub: Soundscapes and Shattered Songs in Jamaican Reggae, pages 26–44, "Electronic Music in Jamaica", Wesleyan University Press ^ a b c Nicholas Collins, Margaret Schedel, Scott Wilson (2013), Electronic Music: Cambridge Introductions to Music, page 20, Cambridge University Press ^ The World of DJs and the Turntable Culture, page 43, Hal Leonard Corporation, 2003 ^ Billboard, 21 May 1977, page 140 ^ Brian Santo, "Consumer Electrics Hall of Fame: The Maysushita/Technics SL-1200," IEEE Spectrum (20 Dec 2018): https://spectrum.ieee.org/consumer-electronics/gadgets/the-consumer-electronics-hall-of-fame-the-matsushitatechnics-sl1200; and Shuichi Obata et al., "...Recent Technology", Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 32/6 (Apr. 1984), 131. ^ a b c Trevor Pinch, Karin Bijsterveld, The Oxford Handbook of Sound Studies, page 515, Oxford University Press ^ "History of the Record Player Part II: The Rise and Fall". Reverb.com. October 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2016. ^ a b Six Machines That Changed The Music World, Wired, May 2002 ^ a b Neil Kulkarni (2015), The Periodic Table of HIP HOP, page 44, Random House ^ a b 808 (documentary film) ^ Vine, Richard (15 June 2011). "Tadao Kikumoto invents the Roland TB-303". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 July 2011. ^ Complex.com ^ Mixmag ^ Pinch, Trevor; Bijsterveld, Karin (2012). The Oxford Handbook of Sound Studies. Oxford University Press. p. 518. ISBN 978-0-19-538894-7. ^ a b Ncube, Rosina (September 2013). "Sounding Off: Why So Few Women In Audio?". Sound on Sound. ^ a b Katz, Mark (12 December 2007). "Men, Women, and Turntables: Gender and the DJ Battle". The Musical Quarterly. 89 (4): 580–599. doi:10.1093/musqtl/gdm007. ^ a b Farrugia, Rebekah (2013). Beyond the Dance Floor: Female DJs, Technology and Electronic Dance Music Culture. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-1841505664. ^ Oldenziel, Ruth A. (1997). "Boys and Their Toys: The Fisher Body Craftsman's Guild, 1930–1968, and the Making of a Male Technical Domain". Technology and Culture. 38 (1): 60–96. doi:10.2307/3106784. JSTOR 3106784. ^ Green, Lucy (2008). Music, Gender, Education. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521555227. ^ "Music – GEA – Gender and Education Association". genderandeducation.com. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 12 March 2016. ^ "Female Turntablists on the Rise". BPMSUPREME TV. Retrieved 12 March 2016. ^ "9 All-Female DJ Collectives You Need To Know Right Now". The FADER. Retrieved 12 March 2016. ^ Robertson, Joel. "TOP 10: Female DJs". Festicket Magazine. Festicke Ltd. Retrieved 13 February 2018. ^ globaldjsguide (23 April 2017). "The Top 10 Female DJs in the world". GlobalDJsGuide. Retrieved 28 May 2020. ^ James, Lauren (14 March 2018). "DJ The Black Madonna on performing at Sónar festivals and making dance music accessible for all". South China Morning Post. ^ Romano, Tricia (18 September 2015). "Decibel Fest DJ Black Madonna and her rebel heart". The Seattle Times. ^ Crecente, Brian (25 August 2018). "How 'Grand Theft Auto' Is Changing the Way the World Experiences Music". Rolling Stone. ^ "Enter". femaledjs.london. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Retrieved 12 March 2016. ^ Rodgers, Tara (2010). Pink Noises: Women on Electronic Music and Sound. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0822346739. ^ "About – Discwoman". www.discwoman.com. Archived from the original on 19 April 2017. Retrieved 12 March 2016. ^ Potier, Morgan; Hoquet, Caroline; Lloyd, Ruth; Nicolas-Puel, Cécile; Uziel, Alain; Puel, Jean-Luc (April 2009). "The Risks of Amplified Music for Disc-Jockeys Working in Nightclubs". Ear & Hearing. 30 (2): 291–293. doi:10.1097/AUD.0b013e31819769fc. PMID 19194290. S2CID 21433591. ^ Santos, Lorayne; Morata, Thais C.; Jacob, Lilian C.; Albizu, Evelyn; Marques, Jair M.; Paini, Michele (January 2007). "Music exposure and audiological findings in Brazilian disc jockeys (DJs): Exposición a la música y hallazgos audiológicos en Disc Jockeys (DJs) Brasileños". International Journal of Audiology. 46 (5): 223–231. doi:10.1080/14992020601188575. PMID 17487670. S2CID 41798256. ^ Bray, Adam; Szyma?ski, Marcin; Mills, Robert (February 2004). "Noise induced hearing loss in dance music disc jockeys and an examination of sound levels in nightclubs". The Journal of Laryngology & Otology. 118 (2): 123–128. doi:10.1258/002221504772784577. PMID 14979949. S2CID 19542748. ^ Suttle, Allan L.; Wallace, Erik A. (April 2011). "Disc Jockey Tenosynovitis". The American Journal of Medicine. 124 (4): e1. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2010.09.025. PMID 21435409. ^ Waters, Thomas R.; Dick, Robert B. (May 2015). "Evidence of Health Risks Associated with Prolonged Standing at Work and Intervention Effectiveness". Rehabilitation Nursing. 40 (3): 148–165. doi:10.1002/rnj.166. PMC 4591921. PMID 25041875. ^ Bahk, Jin Wook; Kim, Hyunjoo; Jung-Choi, Kyunghee; Jung, Myung-Chul; Lee, Inseok (February 2012). "Relationship between prolonged standing and symptoms of varicose veins and nocturnal leg cramps among women and men". Ergonomics. 55 (2): 133–139. doi:10.1080/00140139.2011.582957. PMID 21846281. S2CID 6791057. Notes[edit] Assef, Claudia (2000). Todo DJ Já Sambou: A História do Disc-Jóquei no Brasil. São Paulo: Conrad Editora do Brasil. ISBN 85-87193-94-5. Brewster, Bill, and Frank Broughton (2000). Last Night a DJ Saved My Life: The History of the Disc Jockey. New York: Grove Press. ISBN 0-8021-3688-5 (North American edition). London: Headline. ISBN 0-7472-6230-6 (UK edition). Broughton, Frank, and Bill Brewster. How to DJ Right: The Art and Science of Playing Records. New York: Grove Press, 2003. Graudins, Charles A. How to Be a DJ. Boston: Course Technology PTR, 2004. Lawrence, Tim (2004). Love Saves the Day: A History of American Dance Music Culture, 1970–1979 . Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-3198-5. Miller, Paul D. a.k.a. DJ Spooky, Sound Unbound: Writings on DJ Culture and Electronic Music, MIT Press 2008. ISBN 0-262-63363-9 ISBN 978-0-262-63363-5. Poschardt, Ulf (1998). DJ Culture. London: Quartet Books. ISBN 0-7043-8098-6. Zemon, Stacy. The Mobile DJ Handbook: How to Start & Run a Profitable Mobile Disc Jockey Service, Second Edition. St. Louis: Focal Press, 2002. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: Disc jockey Wikimedia Commons has media related to Disc jockeys. DJs at Curlie v t e DJing and Turntablism Equipment CDJ DJ mixer DJ software Drum machine Effects unit Reverb Digital delay Headphones iPod Magnetic cartridge Mixing console Monitor speaker Phono input PA system Record player Direct-drive turntable SL-1200 Laptop Microphone Minutoli Monitor speaker Pitch control Sampler Slipmat Sound system (DJ) Sound system (Jamaican) Speaker enclosure Subwoofer Synthesizer Two turntables and a microphone Vinyl emulation software Techniques Audio mixing Back spinning Beat juggling Beatmatching Beatmixing Break Chopped and screwed Chopping Covered Cue Cut Drop Harmonic mixing Needle drop Music loop Phrasing Sampling Scratching Slip-cueing Pitch cue Voice-tracking Video scratching Scratches Orbit Tear Transform Flare Chirp Crab Releases and distribution DJ mix Battle records Rare groove Digital pool Remix service Mixtape Related articles Controllerism Hip hop production Rave Record collecting Record producer v t e Hip hop Breaking DJing Graffiti MCing (rapping) Beatboxing Culture Battle rap Dance Fashion Activism Feminism Feminist activism LGBT Festivals Music Production Theater Genres History Five-Percent Nation Universal Zulu Nation Old-school New school Golden age Bristol underground scene Subgenres Alternative Hipster hop Boom bap Bounce British Road rap Chopped and screwed Chopper Cloud rap Comedy Crunk Crunkcore East Coast Freestyle rap G-funk Hardcore Dirty rap Gangsta rap Mafioso rap Horrorcore Memphis rap Hyphy Jerkin' Instrumental Latin Chicano rap Lofi Miami bass Mumble rap Nerdcore Chap hop Political Conscious Progressive rap Religious Christian Jewish Snap music Southern Trap music Afro trap Drill Brooklyn drill UK drill Latin trap Phonk Tread UK trap Turntablism Underground Fusion genres General Country rap Electro Emo rap Hip hop soul Hip house Industrial Jazz rap New jack swing Pop rap Punk rap Ragga Rap opera Rap rock Rap metal Trap metal Rapcore Trip hop Regional Afroswing Bongo flava Boomba music Cumbia rap Genge Hip hop galsen Hipco Hiplife Igbo rap Kwaito Low bap Merenhouse Motswako Na mele paleoleo Nuyorican rap Romany hip hop Songo-salsa Stronda Urban Pasifika Vigilante rap Zenji flava Derivatives Electronic Breakbeat Baltimore club Florida breaks Ghetto house Ghettotech Glitch hop Grime Illbient Latin freestyle Wonky Other Funk carioca Nu metal Reggaeton Alternative reggaeton Regional scenes African Algerian Angolan Beninese Botswana Gambian Ghanaian Ivorian Kenyan Mauritian Moroccan Namibian Nigerian Port Harcourt Nigerien Senegalese South African Tanzanian Togolese Zambian Zimbabwean Asian Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Burmese Chinese Hong Kong Indian Desi Indonesian Japanese Korean Malaysian Nepalese Pakistani Philippine Singapore Sri Lankan Taiwanese Thai European Albanian Austrian Belgian Bosnian and Herzegovinian British Celtic Leeds Scottish Bulgarian Croatian Czech Dutch Finnish French German Greek Portuguese Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Macedonian Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Romanian Romany Russian Serbian Slovak Slovenian Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle Eastern Arabic Egyptian Iranian Israeli Lebanese Palestinian Saudi Arabian Tunisian Turkish Yemeni North American United States: East Coast Baltimore New Jersey New York Philadelphia Washington, D.C. Midwest Chicago Detroit Minneapolis/St. Paul Omaha Southern Atlanta Memphis Miami West Coast Northwest Asian American Latino Native American Outside the US: Canadian Cuban Dominican Haitian Mexican Salvadoran Oceanic Australian New Zealand South American Brazilian Brasília Chilean Colombian Other topics Auto-Tune Contemporary R&B Disc jockey DJ mixer Record player Turntablism Drum machine Sampler Synthesizer Music sequencer Category v t e House music Subgenres Specific Acid house New beat Ambient house Bass house Ballroom Deep house Disco house Diva house Hardbag Electro house Big room house Complextro Fidget house Funky house Future house Garage house Ghetto house Ghettotech Juke house Hip house Jazz house Melodic house Microhouse Moombahton Moombahcore Moombahsoul Nu-disco Outsider house Progressive house Slap house Soulful house Tech house Tribal house Tropical house UK hard house Hard NRG Pumping house Hardbass Scouse house Regional Afro house Amapiano Gqom Kidandali Kwaito Balearic beat Baltimore club Brazilian bass Changa tuki Chicago hard house Chicago house Dutch house Eurohouse French house Italo house Jersey club Latin house Melbourne bounce New Jersey sound Related topics Genres Bassline Big beat Chill-out Disco Dream trance Electro swing Eurodance Footwork Jungle terror Hard dance Madchester (Baggy) Nu jazz Techno Witch house Dance moves Jacking Footwork Other DJ Nightclub Rave v t e Music industry Major companies and organisations Representatives ARIA BVMI BPI Music Canada FIMI IFPI (worldwide) PMB PROMUSICAE RIAA SNEP Music publishers BMG Rights Management Music catalog Sony Music Publishing Universal Music Publishing Group Warner Chappell Music Record labels Major: Sony Universal Warner Independent: Concord Independent UK record labels AAMG Retailers Amazon Digital music stores (iTunes Store) Fnac HMV Trans World Entertainment Virgin Megastores Live music CTS Eventim Live Nation LiveStyle Ticketmaster Major popular genres Avant-garde Blues Contemporary R&B Country Crossover Dance Disco Drum and bass Easy listening Electronica Experimental Folk Funk Gospel Hip hop Instrumental Jazz Latin Metal Motown New Age Operatic pop Pop Punk Reggae Rock Soul Soundtrack World Sectors and roles Album cover design Artists and repertoire (A&R) Disc jockey Distribution Entertainment law Music education Music executive Music journalism Music publisher Music store Music venue Musical instruments Professional audio store Promotion Radio promotion Record label Record shop Road crew Talent manager Tour promoter Production Arrangement Songwriter Composer Lyricist Conductor Disc jockey Hip hop producer Horn section Record producer Rhythm section Orchestrator Session musician Backup singer Ghost singer Vocal coach Ghostwriter Sound engineer Release formats Single (Extended play (EP), 12" single, Cassette single, CD single, Maxi single) Album Double album Music video Promotional recording Phonograph record Eight-track Compact cassette CD DVD Airplay Music download Streaming media Live shows Concert Concert tour Concert residency Music festival Music competition Charts ARIA Charts Billboard Hot 100 Billboard Argentina Hot 100 Brasil Hot 100 Airplay Canadian Hot 100 Gaon Music Chart G-Music Chart Irish Singles Chart Italian Singles Chart GfK Entertainment Charts Entertainment Monitoring Africa Oricon Charts New Zealand Singles Chart Rolling Stone Top 100 Sino Chart SNEP Singles Chart Sverigetopplistan UK Singles Chart Publications Billboard HitQuarters Hot Press Kerrang! Mojo Musica e dischi NME Q Rolling Stone Smash Hits Top of the Pops Television Channels Channel V CMT Fuse Mnet MTV MTV2 Tr3s MuchMusic The Music Factory Viva VH1 The Country Network Series Idol franchise Popstars Star Academy The Four The Voice The X Factor Rising Star Achievements Music award Best-selling music artists Best-selling albums by country Best-selling singles Highest-grossing concert tours Highest-attended concerts Global Recording Artist of the Year Other Album era Album-equivalent unit A-side and B-side Backmasking Bootleg recording Christian music industry Hidden track Largest recorded music markets Music certification Record sales Surprise album White label Category Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) 2 National libraries United States Japan Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Disc_jockey&oldid=1056427154" Categories: Audio mixing Broadcasting occupations Disco DJing Mass media occupations Occupations in music Radio presenters Hip hop production Turntablism Underground culture Electronic dance music 1930s neologisms Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 Articles to be split from May 2020 All articles to be split Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Curlie links Articles with GND identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with multiple identifiers Articles containing video clips Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Languages ??????? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Galego ??? ??????? Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ????? ??????? ??????? Kiswahili ???????? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? ???? Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ???? ????? ?????? ?????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ??????? Shqip Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? ?????? ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 21 November 2021, at 18:55 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disc_jockey Disc jockey - Wikipedia Disc jockey From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Name for person who plays recorded music for an audience "DJ", "DJs", and "Deejay" redirect here. For other uses, see DJ (disambiguation), DJs (disambiguation), and Deejay (disambiguation). Club DJ Robert Hood Radio station DJ in a studio DJ workplace in a nightclub, consisting of three DJ-CD-Players (top), three turntables for vinyl records and a DJ mixer A disc jockey, more commonly abbreviated as DJ, is a person who plays recorded music for an audience. Types of DJs include radio DJs (who host programs on music radio stations), club DJs (who work at a nightclub or music festival), mobile DJs (who are hired to work at public and private events such as weddings, parties, or festivals), and turntablists (who use record players, usually turntables, to manipulate sounds on phonograph records). Originally, the "disc" in "disc jockey" referred to shellac and later vinyl records, but nowadays DJ is used as an all-encompassing term to also describe persons who mix music from other recording media such as cassettes, CDs or digital audio files on a CDJ, controller, or even a laptop. DJs may adopt the title "DJ" in front of their real names, adopted pseudonyms, or stage names.[1] DJs commonly use audio equipment that can play at least two sources of recorded music simultaneously. This enables them to blend tracks together to create seamless transitions between recordings and develop unique mixes of songs. This can involve aligning the beats of the music sources so their rhythms and tempos do not clash when played together and to enable a smooth transition from one song to another. DJs often use specialized DJ mixers, small audio mixers with crossfader and cue functions to blend or transition from one song to another. Mixers are also used to pre-listen to sources of recorded music in headphones and adjust upcoming tracks to mix with currently playing music. DJ software can be used with a DJ controller device to mix audio files on a computer instead of a console mixer. DJs may also use a microphone to speak to the audience; effects units such as reverb to create sound effects and electronic musical instruments such as drum machines and synthesizers. Contents 1 Role 2 Types 2.1 Club DJs 2.2 Hip hop DJs 2.3 Radio DJs 2.4 Dancehall/reggae deejays 2.5 Turntablists 2.6 Residents 2.7 Other types 3 Equipment 3.1 Turntables 3.2 CDJs/media players 3.3 DJ mixers 3.4 Headphones 3.5 Software 3.6 Timecode 3.7 DJ controllers 3.8 Other equipment 4 Techniques 4.1 Miming 5 History 6 Female DJs 7 Health 8 In film 9 See also 10 References 11 Notes 12 External links Role[edit] Originally, the word "disc" in "disc jockey" referred to gramophone records, but now "DJ" is used as an all-encompassing term to describe someone who mixes recorded music from any source, including vinyl records, cassettes, CDs, or digital audio files stored on USB stick or laptop. DJs typically perform for a live audience in a nightclub or dance club or a TV, radio broadcast audience, or an online radio audience. DJs also create mixes, remixes and tracks that are recorded for later sale and distribution. In hip hop music, DJs may create beats, using percussion breaks, basslines and other musical content sampled from pre-existing records. In hip hop, rappers and MCs use these beats to rap over. Some DJs adopt the title "DJ" as part of their names (e.g., DJ Jazzy Jeff, DJ Qbert, DJ Shadow and DJ Yoda). Professional DJs often specialize in a specific genre of music, such as techno, house or hip hop music. DJs typically have an extensive knowledge about the music they specialize in. Many DJs are avid music collectors of vintage, rare or obscure tracks and records. Types[edit] Club DJs[edit] DJ Pete Rock performing at Rahzel and Friends – Brooklyn Bowl, 2016 Club DJs, commonly referred as DJs in general, play music at musical events, such as parties at music venues or bars, music festivals, corporate and private events. Typically, club DJs mix music recordings from two or more sources using different mixing techniques to produce non-stopping flow of music. One key technique used for seamlessly transitioning from one song to another is beatmatching. A DJ who mostly plays and mixes one specific music genre is often given the title of that genre; for example, a DJ who plays hip hop music is called a hip hop DJ, a DJ who plays house music is a house DJ, a DJ who plays techno is called a techno DJ, and so on. The quality of a DJ performance (often called a DJ mix or DJ set) consists of two main features: technical skills, or how well the DJ can operate the equipment and produce smooth transitions between two or more recordings and a playlist; and the ability of a DJ to select the most suitable recordings, also known as "reading the crowd".[2] Hip hop DJs[edit] DJ Kool Herc, Grandmaster Flash, and Afrika Bambaataa were members of a block party at South Bronx. Kool Herc played records such as James Brown's "Give It Up or Turnit a Loose", Jimmy Castor's "It's Just Begun" and Booker T. & the M.G.'s' "Melting Pot".[3] Herc played Incredible Bong Band "Bongo rock", "Apach", and UK rock band Babe Ruth "The Mexican" also. With Bronx clubs struggling with street gangs, uptown DJs catering to an older disco crowd with different aspirations, and commercial radio also catering to a demographic distinct from teenagers in the Bronx, Herc's parties had a ready-made audience.[4][5][6] DJ Kool Herc developed the style that was the blueprint for hip hop music. Herc used the record to focus on a short, heavily percussive part in it: the "break". Since this part of the record was the one the dancers liked best, Herc isolated the break and prolonged it by changing between two record players. As one record reached the end of the break, he cued a second record back to the beginning of the break, which allowed him to extend a relatively short section of music into "five-minute loop of fury".[7] This innovation had its roots in what Herc called "The Merry-Go-Round," a technique by which the deejay switched from break to break at the height of the party. This technique is specifically called "The Merry-Go-Round" because according to Herc, it takes one "back and forth with no slack."[8] Radio DJs[edit] Main article: Radio personality Radio DJs or radio personalities introduce and play music broadcast on AM, FM, digital or Internet radio stations. Dancehall/reggae deejays[edit] Main article: Toasting (Jamaican music) In Jamaican music, a deejay (DJ) is a reggae or dancehall musician who sings and "toasts" (raps) to an instrumental riddim. Deejays are not to be confused with DJs from other music genres like hip hop, where they select and play music. Dancehall/reggae DJs who select riddims to play are called selectors. Deejays whose style is nearer to singing are sometimes called singjays. The term deejay originated in the 1960s and 1970s when performers such as U-Roy or King Stitt toasted over the instrumental (dub music) versions of popular records. These versions were often released on the flip side to the song's 45 record. This gave the deejays the chance to create on-the-fly lyrics to the music. Big Youth, and I Roy were famous deejays in Jamaica. Turntablists[edit] Main article: Turntablism Play media DJ Qbert performing in Rainbow Warehouse in Birmingham (video with close-up photography at the DJ mixer, though without sound) Turntablists, also called battle DJs, use turntables and DJ mixer to manipulate recorded sounds to produce new music. In essence, they use DJ equipment as a musical instrument. Perhaps the best known turntablist technique is scratching. Turntablists often participate in DJ contests like DMC World DJ Championships and Red Bull 3Style.[9] Residents[edit] Main article: Resident DJ A resident DJ performs at a venue on a regular basis or permanently.[10][11][12] They would perform regularly (typically under an agreement) in a particular discotheque, a particular club, a particular event, or a particular broadcasting station.[13][14][15] Residents have a decisive influence on the club or a series of events.[16] Per agreement with the management or company, the DJ would have to perform under agreed times and dates.[11][17] Typically, DJs perform as residents for two or three times in a week, for example, on Friday and Saturday. DJs who make a steady income from a venue are also considered resident DJs.[18][19] Examples for resident DJs are:[20][21] Alfredo Fiorito, Richie Hawtin, Sven Väth — Amnesia, Ibiza, Spain Martin Garrix — Hï Ibiza, Ibiza, Spain Larry Levan — Paradise Garage, New York City, USA David Mancuso — The Loft, New York City Tiësto, Deadmau5, Calvin Harris — Hakkasan, Las Vegas, USA Kaskade — Encore Beach Club, Las Vegas, USA Dom Chung — UK Ben Klock, Marcel Dettmann, Tama Sumo — Berghain, Berlin, Germany Fish Go Deep — Cork, Ireland Djsky — Ghana, West Africa Other types[edit] Mobile DJs — DJs with their own portable audio sound systems who specialize in performing at gatherings such as block parties, street fairs, taverns, weddings, birthdays, school and corporate events. Mobile DJs may also offer lighting packages and video systems.[22] Producer DJs — DJs who create remixes of popular club hits, completely original tracks, or transition friendly versions of tracks which extend the start and end of a song. Producer DJ often have their work featured on online DJ record pools.[23] DJanes — a term describing female DJs used in countries such as Germany that employ grammatical gender in their languages.[24] Celebrity DJs — widely known celebrities performing as DJs.[25] Bedroom DJs — a general term for DJs performing at home, usually recording their sets and posting them online.[26] Equipment[edit] DJs use equipment that enables them to play multiple sources of recorded music and mix them to create seamless transitions and unique arrangements of songs. An important tool for DJs is the specialized DJ mixer, a small audio mixer with a crossfader and cue functions. The crossfader enables the DJ to blend or transition from one song to another. The cue knobs or switches allow the DJ to "listen" to a source of recorded music in headphones before playing it for the live club or broadcast audience. Previewing the music in headphones helps the DJ pick the next track they want to play, cue up the track to the desired starting location, and align the two tracks' beats in traditional situations where auto sync technology is not being used. This process ensures that the selected song will mix well with the currently playing music. DJs may align the beats of the music sources so their rhythms do not clash when they are played together to help create a smooth transition from one song to another. Other equipment may include a microphone, effects units such as reverb, and electronic musical instruments such as drum machines and synthesizers. As music technology has progressed, DJs have adopted different types of equipment to play and mix music, all of which are still commonly used. Traditionally, DJs used two turntables plugged into a DJ mixer to mix music on vinyl records. As compact discs became popular media for publishing music, specialized high quality CD players known as CDJs were developed for DJs. CDJs can take the place of turntables or be used together with turntables. Many CDJs can now play digital music files from USB flash drives or SD cards in addition to CDs. With the spread of portable laptop, tablet, and smartphone computers, DJs began using software together with specialized sound cards and DJ controller hardware. DJ software can be used in conjunction with a hardware DJ mixer or be used instead of a hardware mixer. Turntables[edit] Main article: Turntablism DJ Spooky at the Sundance Film Festival in 2003, using two Technics SL-1200 turntables and a DJ mixer Turntables allow DJs to play vinyl records. By adjusting the playback speed of the turntable, either by adjusting the speed knob, or by manipulating the platter (e.g., by slowing down the platter by putting a finger gently along the side), DJs can match the tempos of different records so their rhythms can be played together at the same time without clashing or make a smooth, seamless transition from one song to another. This technique is known as beatmatching. DJs typically replace the rubber mat on turntables that keeps the record moving in sync with the turntable with a slipmat that facilitates manipulating the playback of the record by hand. With the slipmat, the DJ can stop or slow down the record while the turntable is still spinning. Direct-drive turntables are the type preferred by DJs. Belt-drive turntables are less expensive, but they are not suitable for turntablism and DJing, because the belt-drive motor can be damaged by this type of manipulation. Some DJs, most commonly those who play hip hop music, go beyond merely mixing records and use turntables as musical instruments for scratching, beat juggling, and other turntablism techniques. CDJs/media players[edit] Main article: CDJ CDJs / media players are high quality digital media players made for DJing. They often have large jog wheels and pitch controls to allow DJs to manipulate the playback of digital files for beatmatching similar to how DJs manipulate vinyl records on turntables. CDJs often have features such as loops and waveform displays similar to DJ software. Originally designed to play music from compact discs, they now can play digital music files stored on USB flash drives and SD cards. Some CDJs can also connect to a computer running DJ software to act as a DJ controller. Modern media players have the ability to stream music from online music providers such as Beatport, Beatsource, Tidal and Soundcloud GO.[27] DJ mixers[edit] Main article: DJ mixer A Numark DM2002X Pro Master DJ mixer. This three channel mixer can have up to three input sound sources. The gain control knobs and equalization control knobs allow the volume and tone of each sound source to be adjusted. The vertical faders allow for further adjustment of the volume of each sound source. The horizontally-mounted crossfader enables the DJ to smoothly transition from a song on one sound source to a song from a different sound source. DJ mixers are small audio mixing consoles specialized for DJing. Most DJ mixers have far fewer channels than a mixer used by a record producer or audio engineer; whereas standard live sound mixers in small venues have 12 to 24 channels, and standard recording studio mixers have even more (as many as 72 on large boards), basic DJ mixers may have only two channels. While DJ mixers have many of the same features found on larger mixers (faders, equalization knobs, gain knobs, effects units, etc.), DJ mixers have a feature that is usually only found on DJ mixers: the crossfader. The crossfader is a type of fader that is mounted horizontally. DJs used the crossfader to mix two or more sound sources. The midpoint of the crossfader's travel is a 50/50 mix of the two channels (on a two channel mixer). The far left side of the crossfader provides only the channel A sound source. The far right side provides only the channel B sound source (e.g., record player number 2). Positions in between the two extremes provide different mixes of the two channels. Some DJs use a computer with DJ software and a DJ controller instead of an analog DJ mixer to mix music, although DJ software can be used in conjunction with a hardware DJ mixer. Headphones[edit] Main article: Headphones DJs generally use higher quality headphones than those designed for music consumers. DJ headphones have other properties useful for DJs, such as designs that acoustically isolate the sounds of the headphones from the outside environment (hard shell headphones), flexible headbands and pivot joints to allow DJs to listen to one side of the headphones, while turning the other headphone away (so they can monitor the mix in the club), and replaceable cables. Replaceable cables enables DJs to buy new cables if a cable becomes frayed, worn, or damaged, or if a cable is accidentally cut. Closed-back headphones are highly recommended for DJs to block outside noise as the environment of DJ usually tend to be very noisy. Standard headphones have 3.5mm jack but DJ equipment usually requires ¼ inch jack. Most of specialized DJ Headphones have an adapter to switch between 3.5mm jack and ¼ inch jack. Detachable coiled cables are perfect for DJ Headphones.[28] Software[edit] It has been suggested that this article be split into a new article titled DJ software. (Discuss) (May 2020) See also: List of music software § DJ software A screenshot of Mixxx DJ software running on Mac OS X DJs have changed their equipment as new technologies are introduced. The earliest DJs in pop music, in 1970s discos, used record turntables, vinyl records and audio consoles. In the 1970s, DJs would have to lug heavy direct drive turntables and crates of records to clubs and shows. In the 1980s, many DJs transitioned to compact cassettes. In the 1990s and 2000s, many DJs switched to using digital audio such as CDs and MP3 files. As technological advances made it practical to store large collections of digital music files on a laptop computer, DJ software was developed so DJs could use a laptop as a source of music instead of transporting CDs or vinyl records to gigs. Unlike most music player software designed for regular consumers, DJ software can play at least two audio files simultaneously, display the waveforms of the files on screen and enable the DJ to listen to either source. The waveforms allow the DJ see what is coming next in the music and how the playback of different files is aligned. The software analyzes music files to identify their tempo and where the beats are. The analyzed information can be used by the DJ to help manually beatmatch like with vinyl records or the software can automatically synchronize the beats. Digital signal processing algorithms in software allow DJs to adjust the tempo of recordings independently of their pitch (and musical key, a feature known as "keylock". Some software analyzes the loudness of the music for automatic normalization with ReplayGain and detects the musical key. Additionally, DJ software can store cue points, set loops, and apply effects. As tablet computers and smartphones became widespread, DJ software was written to run on these devices in addition to laptops. DJ software requires specialized hardware in addition to a computer to fully take advantage of its features. The consumer grade, regular sound card integrated into most computer motherboards can only output two channels (one stereo pair). However, DJs need to be able to output at least four channels (two stereo pairs, thus Left and Right for input 1 and Left and Right for input 2), either unmixed signals to send to a DJ mixer or a main output plus a headphone output. Additionally, DJ sound cards output higher quality signals than the sound cards built into consumer-grade computer motherboards. Timecode[edit] Special vinyl records (or CDs/digital files played with CDJs) can be used with DJ software to play digital music files with DJ software as if they were pressed onto vinyl, allowing turntablism techniques to be used with digital files. These vinyl records do not have music recordings pressed on to them. Instead, they are pressed with a special signal, referred to as "timecode", to control DJ software. The DJ software interprets changes in the playback speed, direction, and position of the timecode signal and manipulates the digital files it is playing in the same way that the turntable manipulates the timecode record. This requires a specialized DJ sound card with at least 4 channels (2 stereo pairs) of inputs and outputs. With this setup, the DJ software typically outputs unmixed signals from the music files to an external hardware DJ mixer. Some DJ mixers have integrated USB sound cards that allow DJ software to connect directly to the mixer without requiring a separate sound card. DJ controllers[edit] Main article: DJ controller A DJ software can be used to mix audio files on the computer instead of a separate hardware mixer. When mixing on a computer, DJs often use a DJ controller device that mimics the layout of two turntables plus a DJ mixer to control the software rather than the computer keyboard & touchpad on a laptop, or the touchscreen on a tablet computer or smartphone. Many DJ controllers have an integrated sound card with 4 output channels (2 stereo pairs) that allows the DJ to use headphones to preview music before playing it on the main output.[29] Other equipment[edit] A microphone, so that the DJ can introduce songs and speak to the audience over the sound system. Electronic effects units such as delay, reverb, octave, equalizer, chorus, etc. Multi-stylus head shells, which allow a DJ to play different grooves of the same record at the same time. Samplers, sequencers, electronic musical keyboards (synthesizers), effects pedals (effects unit) or drum machines. PA system or sound reinforcement system (power amplifiers and speaker enclosures), typically including subwoofer cabinets for deep bass (or, if a DJ is broadcasting and/or recording a set, broadcasting equipment or recording gear) Monitor speakers, for listening to the "house mix" that is playing over the main speakers Techniques[edit] In the early 1970s in the South Bronx, a young teen DJ called Grand Wizzard Theodore invented the "DJ scratch" technique. Other DJs, like Grandmaster Flash, took the technique to higher levels to the familiar sound and technique we hear today. Several techniques are used by DJs as a means to better mix and blend recorded music. These techniques primarily include the cueing, equalization and audio mixing of two or more sound sources. The complexity and frequency of special techniques depends largely on the setting in which a DJ is working. Radio DJs are less likely to focus on advanced music-mixing procedures than club DJs, who rely on a smooth transition between songs using a range of techniques. However, some radio DJs are experienced club DJs, so they use the same sophisticated mixing techniques. Club DJ turntable techniques include beatmatching, phrasing and slip-cueing to preserve energy on a dance floor. Turntablism embodies the art of cutting, beat juggling, scratching, needle drops, phase shifting, back spinning and more to perform the transitions and overdubs of samples in a more creative manner (although turntablism is often considered a use of the turntable as a musical instrument rather than a tool for blending recorded music). Professional DJs may use harmonic mixing to choose songs that are in compatible musical keys.[30][31] Other techniques include chopping, screwing and looping. Recent advances in technology in both DJ hardware and software can provide assisted or automatic completion of some traditional DJ techniques and skills. Examples include phrasing and beatmatching, which can be partially or completely automated by using DJ software that performs automatic synchronization of sound recordings, a feature commonly labelled "sync". Most DJ mixers now include a beat-counter which analyzes the tempo of an incoming sound source and displays its tempo in beats per minute (BPM), which may assist with beatmatching analog sound sources. In the past, being a DJ has largely been a self-taught craft but with the complexities of new technologies and the convergence with music production methods, there are a growing number of schools and organizations that offer instruction on the techniques.[32] Miming[edit] In DJ culture, miming refers to the practice of DJ's pantomiming the actions of live-mixing a set on stage while a pre-recorded mix plays over the sound system.[33][34] Miming mixing in a live performance is considered to be controversial within DJ culture.[35] Some within the DJ community say that miming is increasingly used as a technique by celebrity model DJs who may lack mixing skills, but can draw big crowds to a venue.[36] During a DJ tour for the release of the French group Justice's A Cross the Universe in November 2008, controversy arose when a photograph of Augé DJing with an unplugged Akai MPD24 surfaced. The photograph sparked accusations that Justice's live sets were faked. Augé has since said that the equipment was unplugged very briefly before being reattached and the band put a three-photo set of the incident on their MySpace page.[37][38] After a 2013 Disclosure concert, the duo was criticized for pretending to live mix to a playback of a pre-recorded track. Disclosure's Guy Lawrence said they did not deliberately intend to mislead their audience, and cited miming by other DJs such as David Guetta.[39] History[edit] For the history of club DJs, see History of DJing. For the history of radio DJs, see History of radio disc jockeys. The term "disc jockey" was ostensibly coined by radio gossip commentator Walter Winchell in 1935, and the phrase first appeared in print in a 1941 Variety magazine, used to describe radio personalities who introduced phonograph records on the air.[40][41] Playing recorded music for dancing and parties rose with the mass marketing of home phonographs in the late 19th century. British radio disc jockey Jimmy Savile hosted his first live dance party in 1943 using a single turntable and a makeshift sound system. Four years later, Savile began using two turntables welded together to form a single DJ console.[42] In 1947, the Whiskey A Go-Go opened in Paris as the first discotheque.[43] In the 1960s, Rudy Bozak began making the first DJ mixers, mixing consoles specialized for DJing. In the late 1960s to early 1970s Jamaican sound system culture, producer and sound system operator (DJ), (Jamaican) King Tubby and producer Lee "Scratch" Perry were pioneers of the genre known as dub music.[44][45] They experimented with tape-based composition; emphasized repetitive rhythmic structures (often stripped of their harmonic elements); electronically manipulated spatiality; sonically manipulated pre-recorded musical materials from mass media;[44] and remixed music among other innovative techniques.[45] It is widely known that the Jamaican dancehall culture has had and continues to have a significant impact on the American hip hop culture.[44][45] Vintage DJ Station. A DJ mixer is placed between the two turntables. Pioneer DDJ-RX controller running with rekordbox on a computer DJ turntablism has origins in the invention of direct-drive turntables. Early belt-drive turntables were unsuitable for turntablism and mixing, since they had a slow start-up time, and they were prone to wear-and-tear and breakage, as the belt would break from backspinning or scratching.[46] The first direct-drive turntable was invented by engineer Shuichi Obata at Matsushita (now Panasonic),[47] based in Osaka, Japan.[48] It eliminated belts, and instead employed a motor to directly drive a platter on which a vinyl record rests.[49] In 1969, Matsushita released it as the SP-10,[49] the first direct-drive turntable on the market,[50] and the first in their influential Technics series of turntables.[49] In 1972, Technics started making their SL-1200 turntable, featuring high torque direct drive design.[51] The SL-1200 had a rapid start and its durable direct drive enabled DJs to manipulate the platter, as with scratching techniques. Hip hop DJs began using the Technics SL-1200s as musical instruments to manipulate records with turntablism techniques such as scratching and beat juggling rather than merely mixing records. These techniques were developed in the 1970s by DJ Kool Herc, Grand Wizard Theodore, and Afrika Bambaataa, as they experimented with Technics direct-drive decks, finding that the motor would continue to spin at the correct RPM even if the DJ wiggled the record back and forth on the platter.[51] In 1980, Japanese company Roland released the TR-808, an analog rhythm/drum machine, which has unique artificial sounds, such as its booming bass and sharp snare, and a metronome-like rhythm. Yellow Magic Orchestra's use of the instrument in 1980 influenced hip hop pioneer Afrika Bambaataa, after which the TR-808 would be widely adopted by hip hop DJs, with 808 sounds remaining central to hip-hop music ever since.[52][53] The Roland TB-303, a bass synthesizer released in 1981, had a similar impact on electronic dance music genres such as techno and house music,[54][52] along with Roland's TR-808[53] and TR-909 drum machines.[55][56] In 1982, the Compact Disc (CD) format was released, popularizing digital audio. In 1998, the first MP3 digital audio player, the Eiger Labs MPMan F10, was introduced. In January of that same year at the BeOS Developer Conference, N2IT demonstrated FinalScratch, the first digital DJ system to allow DJs control of MP3 files through special time-coded vinyl records or CDs.[57] While it would take some time for this novel concept to catch on with the "die-hard Vinyl DJs," this would become the first step in the Digital DJ revolution. Manufacturers joined with computer DJing pioneers to offer professional endorsements, the first being Professor Jam (a.k.a. William P. Rader), who went on to develop the industry's first dedicated computer DJ convention and learning program, the "CPS (Computerized Performance System) DJ Summit", to help spread the word about the advantages of this emerging technology. In 2001, Pioneer DJ began producing the CDJ-1000 CD player, making the use of digital music recordings with traditional DJ techniques practical for the first time. As the 2000s progressed, laptop computers became more powerful and affordable. DJ software, specialized DJ sound cards, and DJ controllers were developed for DJs to use laptops as a source of music rather than turntables or CDJs. In the 2010s, like laptops before them, tablet computers and smartphones became more powerful & affordable. DJ software was written to run on these more portable devices instead of laptops, although laptops remain the more common type of computer for DJing. Female DJs[edit] In Western popular music, women musicians have achieved great success in singing and songwriting roles, however, there are relatively few women DJs or turntablists. Part of this may stem from a general low percentage of women in audio technology-related jobs. A 2013 Sound on Sound article stated that there are "...few women in record production and sound engineering."[58] Ncube states that "[n]inety-five percent of music producers are male, and although there are female producers achieving great things in music, they are less well-known than their male counterparts."[58] The vast majority of students in music technology programs are male. In hip hop music, the low percentage of women DJs and turntablists may stem from the overall male domination of the entire hip hop music industry. Most of the top rappers, MCs, DJs, record producers and music executives are men. There are a small number of high-profile women, but they are rare. In 2007 Mark Katz's article "Men, Women, and Turntables: Gender and the DJ Battle," stated that "very few women [do turntablism] battle[s]; the matter has been a topic of conversation among hip-hop DJs for years."[59] In 2010 Rebekah Farrugia states "the male-centricity of EDM culture" contributes to "a marginalisation of women in these [EDM] spaces."[60] While turntablism and broader DJ practices should not be conflated, Katz suggests use or lack of use of the turntable broadly by women across genres and disciplines is impacted upon by what he defines as "male technophilia."[59] Historian Ruth Oldenziel concurs in her writing on engineering with this idea of socialization as a central factor in the lack of engagement with technology. She explains: "an exclusive focus on women's supposed failure to enter the field … is insufficient for understanding how our stereotypical notions have come into being; it tends to put the burden of proof entirely on women and to blame them for their supposedly inadequate socialization, their lack of aspiration, and their want of masculine values. An equally challenging question is why and how boys have come to love things technical, how boys have historically been socialized as technophiles."[61] French electronic music producer and DJ Miss Kittin Lucy Green has focused on gender in relation to musical performers and creators, and specifically on educational frameworks as they relate to both.[62] She suggests that women's alienation from "areas that have a strong technological tendency such as DJing, sound engineering and producing" are "not necessarily about her dislike of these instruments but relates to the interrupting effect of their dominantly masculine delineations."[63] Despite this, women and girls do increasingly engage in turntable and DJ practices, individually[64] and collectively,[65] and "carve out spaces for themselves in EDM and DJ Culture".[60] A 2015 article cited a number of prominent female DJs: Hannah Wants, Ellen Allien, Miss Kittin, Monika Kruse, Nicole Moudaber, B.Traits, Magda, Nina Kraviz, Nervo, and Annie Mac.[66] Two years later, another article brings out a list with world-famous female DJs including Nastia, tINY, Nora En Pure, Anja Schneider, Peggy Gou, Maya Jane Coles, and Eli & Fur.[67] Female DJ The Black Madonna has been called "one of the world’s most exciting turntablists."[68] Her stage name The Black Madonna is a tribute to her mother's favorite Catholic saint.[69] In 2018, The Black Madonna played herself as an in-residence DJ for the video game Grand Theft Auto Online, as part of the After Hours DLC.[70] There are various projects dedicated to the promotion and support of these practices such as Female DJs London.[71] Some artists and collectives go beyond these practices to be more gender inclusive.[72] For example, Discwoman, a New York-based collective and booking agency, describe themselves as "representing and showcasing cis women, trans women and genderqueer talent."[73] In Japan, the newest Bushiroad franchise: D4DJ focuses all-female DJ unit. Health[edit] Main article: Health problems of musicians The risk of DJ's working in nightclubs with loud music includes noise-induced hearing loss and tinnitus.[74] Nightclubs constantly exceed safe levels of noise exposure with average sound levels ranging from 93.2 to 109.7 dB.[75] Constant music exposure creates temporary and permanent auditory dysfunction for professional DJ's with average levels at 96dB being above the recommended level, at which ear protection is mandatory for industry. Three quarters of DJ's have tinnitus[76] and are at risk of tenosynovitis in the wrists and other limbs. Tenosynovitis results from staying in the same position over multiple gigs for scratching motion and cueing, this would be related to a repetitive strain injury.[77] Gigs can last 4-5 hours in nightlife and the hospitality industry, as a result there are potential complications of prolonged standing which include slouching, varicose veins, cardiovascular disorders, joint compression, and muscle fatigue.[78][79] This is common for other staff to experience as well including bartenders and security staff for example. In film[edit] Berlin Calling – a German film about fictional DJ and producer Ickarus (Paul Kalkbrenner), who is struggling with drug abuse Speaking in Code – an American documentary film about techno artists Modeselektor, Wighnomy Brothers, Philip Sherburne, Monolake and David Day Kvadrat – a French and Russian documentary film about the realities of techno DJing, using the example of DJ Andrey Pushkarev It's All Gone Pete Tong – a fictional mockumentary British movie about Frankie Wilde, a DJ who gradually becomes deaf due to drug abuse and an unhealthy lifestyle We Are Your Friends – an American fiction film about a college DJ trying to make it in the DJing scene with "one hit song", starring Zac Efron Scratch – a documentary about the hip-hop DJ and the 2000-era turntablist movement Tonkatsu DJ Agetarou – a Japanese anime, originally a manga, about a fictional character named Agetarou who aspires to be a DJ master with the help of his friends and mentor, Big Master Fry. 24 Hour Party People – about the UK music scene from the late 1970s to the "Madchester" scene of the late 1980s and early 1990s. Human Traffic – about early UK rave counter-culture featuring music and performances by celebrated DJs Fatboy Slim, CJ Bolland, Carl Cox, and Mad Doctor X. Turn Up Charlie – a 2019 series about a struggling DJ, played by Idris Elba, who is also a bachelor trying to make it again after a one hit back in the 1990s Avicii: True Stories – a documentary film about Avicii See also[edit] Digital DJ licensing List of club DJs List of music software#DJ software Live PA DJ mix Record collecting Spelling of disc Stage lighting VJ (media personality) References[edit] ^ "What is a DJ?". We Are Crossfader - Learn How To DJ Online. 12 August 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2021. ^ How To Read A Crowd (And What Happens If You Don’t), Digital DJ Tips, 3 November 2017 ^ Shapiro, pp. 212–213. ^ Shapiro, Peter. Rough Guide to Hip-Hop, 2nd. ed., London: Rough Guides, 2005 ISBN 978-1-84353-263-7. pp.212–213. ^ Toop, David. Rap Attack, 3rd. ed., London: Serpent's Tail, 2000 ISBN 978-1-85242-627-9 p.65. ^ Ogg, Alex, with Upshall, David. The Hip Hop Years, London: Macmillan, 1999 ISBN 978-0-7522-1780-2 p.18. ^ Chang, Jeff. Can't Stop Won't Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop Generation. St. Martin's Press, New York: 2005. ISBN 978-0-312-42579-1 p. 79. ^ falkmanbeatz -break bboy / bgirl channel- (8 January 2014), The Freshest Kids: The History of the B-Boy (Full Documentary), archived from the original on 21 April 2014, retrieved 26 April 2017 ^ Red Bull 3Style ^ Thorp, John (7 January 2014). "Resident DJs Are The Heroes Of Clubbing, And We Need To Show Them Love | Thump". Thump. Vice. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ a b Celikbas, Murat (1 October 2013). "What Is "Being A Resident DJ" ? |". Digital DJ INFO. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ "The Do's and Don'ts of Being a Weekly Resident DJ". Complex. 14 November 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ "DARIUS SYROSSIAN (BEST RESIDENT DJ)". DJMag.com. 18 December 2014. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ "Resident DJ Mednas Dishes On Miami LIV-ing". Vibe. 19 April 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ Ncube, Dumisani. "The Monitor :: Variety Of Talent At Next Big EDM DJ". The Monitor. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ Frankland, Becca (7 February 2017). "mUmU Liverpool 9th birthday review". Skiddle.com. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ Robinson, Tyler (9 March 2016). "How to Become the Resident Dj At Your Local Nightclub". www.magneticmag.com. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ Golden, Ean (16 April 2015). "How to Get a DJ Residency". DJ TechTools. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ "5 clubs you need to visit before you die". www.redbull.com. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ "Top 10 Resident DJs of all Time". DJBroadcast. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ "10 Resident DJs Who Changed EDM". Billboard. Retrieved 9 February 2017. ^ Stacy Zemon (24 July 2013). The Mobile DJ Handbook: How to Start & Run a Profitable Mobile Disc Jockey Service. Taylor & Francis. pp. 6–. ISBN 978-1-136-11734-3. ^ "How to DJ: How to Become a DJ, Start a Business, and Make Money". DJ Play It. 9 April 2019. Retrieved 12 April 2019. ^ Mark J. Butler (2014). Playing with Something that Runs: Technology, Improvisation, and Composition in DJ and Laptop Performance. Oxford University Press. pp. 111–. ISBN 978-0-19-539362-0. ^ Shaquille O'Neal had a blast performing at an electronic music festival as 'DJ Diesel', USA Today Sports, 25 July 2016 ^ Minieri, Nick (12 November 2012). "Bedroom DJ Woes: Why You're Not Getting Booked (And What To Do About It)". DJ Tech Tools. DJ TechTools. Retrieved 25 January 2018. ^ "Denon DJ SC6000, SC6000M & X1850 First Look - We Are Crossfader". We Are Crossfader - Learn How To DJ Online. 9 January 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2021. ^ GetAHeadphone (2016), Best DJ Headphones, retrieved 27 October 2016 ^ Steventon, John, 1975– (3 December 2014). DJing for dummies (3rd ed.). Chichester, West Sussex. ISBN 9781118937280. OCLC 888464041.CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ "Harmonic mixing: The Basics". Retrieved 29 December 2013. ^ "DJ Mixes Remixes". Retrieved 29 December 2013. ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 15 August 2014. Retrieved 8 April 2014.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ Wendy Fonarow. Empire of Dirt: The Aesthetics and Rituals of British Indie Music. Wesleyan University Press; 10 July 2006. ISBN 978-0-8195-6811-3. p. 270–. ^ Charles Kriel. How to DVJ: A Digital DJ Masterclass. CRC Press; 25 January 2013. ISBN 978-1-136-12270-5. p. 106–. ^ Heath, Harold. "Crimes against DJing. What's the single worst sin a DJ can commit?". International DJ Magazine. International DJ Magazine. Retrieved 1 July 2017. ^ Calvano, Jordan (11 May 2015). "This is the most fake DJ set you have ever seen". www.magneticmag.com. Magnetic Magazine. Retrieved 30 June 2017. ^ "Justice Unplugged". URB. 18 November 2008. Archived from the original on 19 December 2008. Retrieved 19 December 2008. ^ "Justice fake DJ set – (false) panic in technoland". Side-Line Magazine. 28 November 2008. Archived from the original on 14 February 2013. Retrieved 1 September 2017. ^ Payne, Chris (10 June 2013). "Disclosure Explains Their Unplugged Miming Performance in London". Billboard.com. Billboard. Retrieved 1 July 2017. ^ Rohter, Larry (16 August 2010). "Museum Acquires Storied Trove of Performances by Jazz Greats". New York Times. Retrieved 30 October 2010. ^ "OED Appeals". oed.com. Oxford English Dictionary. Retrieved 19 September 2016. ^ Luke Crisell; Phil White; Rob Principe (14 April 2009). On the Record: The Scratch DJ Academy Guide. St. Martin's Publishing Group. pp. 23–. ISBN 978-1-4299-6623-8. ^ "So You Want To Be A DJ? History". UF Interactive Media Lab. University of Florida. Retrieved 19 September 2016. ^ a b c Michael Veal (2013), Dub: Soundscapes and Shattered Songs in Jamaican Reggae, pages 26–44, "Electronic Music in Jamaica", Wesleyan University Press ^ a b c Nicholas Collins, Margaret Schedel, Scott Wilson (2013), Electronic Music: Cambridge Introductions to Music, page 20, Cambridge University Press ^ The World of DJs and the Turntable Culture, page 43, Hal Leonard Corporation, 2003 ^ Billboard, 21 May 1977, page 140 ^ Brian Santo, "Consumer Electrics Hall of Fame: The Maysushita/Technics SL-1200," IEEE Spectrum (20 Dec 2018): https://spectrum.ieee.org/consumer-electronics/gadgets/the-consumer-electronics-hall-of-fame-the-matsushitatechnics-sl1200; and Shuichi Obata et al., "...Recent Technology", Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 32/6 (Apr. 1984), 131. ^ a b c Trevor Pinch, Karin Bijsterveld, The Oxford Handbook of Sound Studies, page 515, Oxford University Press ^ "History of the Record Player Part II: The Rise and Fall". Reverb.com. October 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2016. ^ a b Six Machines That Changed The Music World, Wired, May 2002 ^ a b Neil Kulkarni (2015), The Periodic Table of HIP HOP, page 44, Random House ^ a b 808 (documentary film) ^ Vine, Richard (15 June 2011). "Tadao Kikumoto invents the Roland TB-303". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 July 2011. ^ Complex.com ^ Mixmag ^ Pinch, Trevor; Bijsterveld, Karin (2012). The Oxford Handbook of Sound Studies. Oxford University Press. p. 518. ISBN 978-0-19-538894-7. ^ a b Ncube, Rosina (September 2013). "Sounding Off: Why So Few Women In Audio?". Sound on Sound. ^ a b Katz, Mark (12 December 2007). "Men, Women, and Turntables: Gender and the DJ Battle". The Musical Quarterly. 89 (4): 580–599. doi:10.1093/musqtl/gdm007. ^ a b Farrugia, Rebekah (2013). Beyond the Dance Floor: Female DJs, Technology and Electronic Dance Music Culture. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-1841505664. ^ Oldenziel, Ruth A. (1997). "Boys and Their Toys: The Fisher Body Craftsman's Guild, 1930–1968, and the Making of a Male Technical Domain". Technology and Culture. 38 (1): 60–96. doi:10.2307/3106784. JSTOR 3106784. ^ Green, Lucy (2008). Music, Gender, Education. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521555227. ^ "Music – GEA – Gender and Education Association". genderandeducation.com. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 12 March 2016. ^ "Female Turntablists on the Rise". BPMSUPREME TV. Retrieved 12 March 2016. ^ "9 All-Female DJ Collectives You Need To Know Right Now". The FADER. Retrieved 12 March 2016. ^ Robertson, Joel. "TOP 10: Female DJs". Festicket Magazine. Festicke Ltd. Retrieved 13 February 2018. ^ globaldjsguide (23 April 2017). "The Top 10 Female DJs in the world". GlobalDJsGuide. Retrieved 28 May 2020. ^ James, Lauren (14 March 2018). "DJ The Black Madonna on performing at Sónar festivals and making dance music accessible for all". South China Morning Post. ^ Romano, Tricia (18 September 2015). "Decibel Fest DJ Black Madonna and her rebel heart". The Seattle Times. ^ Crecente, Brian (25 August 2018). "How 'Grand Theft Auto' Is Changing the Way the World Experiences Music". Rolling Stone. ^ "Enter". femaledjs.london. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Retrieved 12 March 2016. ^ Rodgers, Tara (2010). Pink Noises: Women on Electronic Music and Sound. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0822346739. ^ "About – Discwoman". www.discwoman.com. Archived from the original on 19 April 2017. Retrieved 12 March 2016. ^ Potier, Morgan; Hoquet, Caroline; Lloyd, Ruth; Nicolas-Puel, Cécile; Uziel, Alain; Puel, Jean-Luc (April 2009). "The Risks of Amplified Music for Disc-Jockeys Working in Nightclubs". Ear & Hearing. 30 (2): 291–293. doi:10.1097/AUD.0b013e31819769fc. PMID 19194290. S2CID 21433591. ^ Santos, Lorayne; Morata, Thais C.; Jacob, Lilian C.; Albizu, Evelyn; Marques, Jair M.; Paini, Michele (January 2007). "Music exposure and audiological findings in Brazilian disc jockeys (DJs): Exposición a la música y hallazgos audiológicos en Disc Jockeys (DJs) Brasileños". International Journal of Audiology. 46 (5): 223–231. doi:10.1080/14992020601188575. PMID 17487670. S2CID 41798256. ^ Bray, Adam; Szyma?ski, Marcin; Mills, Robert (February 2004). "Noise induced hearing loss in dance music disc jockeys and an examination of sound levels in nightclubs". The Journal of Laryngology & Otology. 118 (2): 123–128. doi:10.1258/002221504772784577. PMID 14979949. S2CID 19542748. ^ Suttle, Allan L.; Wallace, Erik A. (April 2011). "Disc Jockey Tenosynovitis". The American Journal of Medicine. 124 (4): e1. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2010.09.025. PMID 21435409. ^ Waters, Thomas R.; Dick, Robert B. (May 2015). "Evidence of Health Risks Associated with Prolonged Standing at Work and Intervention Effectiveness". Rehabilitation Nursing. 40 (3): 148–165. doi:10.1002/rnj.166. PMC 4591921. PMID 25041875. ^ Bahk, Jin Wook; Kim, Hyunjoo; Jung-Choi, Kyunghee; Jung, Myung-Chul; Lee, Inseok (February 2012). "Relationship between prolonged standing and symptoms of varicose veins and nocturnal leg cramps among women and men". Ergonomics. 55 (2): 133–139. doi:10.1080/00140139.2011.582957. PMID 21846281. S2CID 6791057. Notes[edit] Assef, Claudia (2000). Todo DJ Já Sambou: A História do Disc-Jóquei no Brasil. São Paulo: Conrad Editora do Brasil. ISBN 85-87193-94-5. Brewster, Bill, and Frank Broughton (2000). Last Night a DJ Saved My Life: The History of the Disc Jockey. New York: Grove Press. ISBN 0-8021-3688-5 (North American edition). London: Headline. ISBN 0-7472-6230-6 (UK edition). Broughton, Frank, and Bill Brewster. How to DJ Right: The Art and Science of Playing Records. New York: Grove Press, 2003. Graudins, Charles A. How to Be a DJ. Boston: Course Technology PTR, 2004. Lawrence, Tim (2004). Love Saves the Day: A History of American Dance Music Culture, 1970–1979 . Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-3198-5. Miller, Paul D. a.k.a. DJ Spooky, Sound Unbound: Writings on DJ Culture and Electronic Music, MIT Press 2008. ISBN 0-262-63363-9 ISBN 978-0-262-63363-5. Poschardt, Ulf (1998). DJ Culture. London: Quartet Books. ISBN 0-7043-8098-6. Zemon, Stacy. The Mobile DJ Handbook: How to Start & Run a Profitable Mobile Disc Jockey Service, Second Edition. St. Louis: Focal Press, 2002. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: Disc jockey Wikimedia Commons has media related to Disc jockeys. DJs at Curlie v t e DJing and Turntablism Equipment CDJ DJ mixer DJ software Drum machine Effects unit Reverb Digital delay Headphones iPod Magnetic cartridge Mixing console Monitor speaker Phono input PA system Record player Direct-drive turntable SL-1200 Laptop Microphone Minutoli Monitor speaker Pitch control Sampler Slipmat Sound system (DJ) Sound system (Jamaican) Speaker enclosure Subwoofer Synthesizer Two turntables and a microphone Vinyl emulation software Techniques Audio mixing Back spinning Beat juggling Beatmatching Beatmixing Break Chopped and screwed Chopping Covered Cue Cut Drop Harmonic mixing Needle drop Music loop Phrasing Sampling Scratching Slip-cueing Pitch cue Voice-tracking Video scratching Scratches Orbit Tear Transform Flare Chirp Crab Releases and distribution DJ mix Battle records Rare groove Digital pool Remix service Mixtape Related articles Controllerism Hip hop production Rave Record collecting Record producer v t e Hip hop Breaking DJing Graffiti MCing (rapping) Beatboxing Culture Battle rap Dance Fashion Activism Feminism Feminist activism LGBT Festivals Music Production Theater Genres History Five-Percent Nation Universal Zulu Nation Old-school New school Golden age Bristol underground scene Subgenres Alternative Hipster hop Boom bap Bounce British Road rap Chopped and screwed Chopper Cloud rap Comedy Crunk Crunkcore East Coast Freestyle rap G-funk Hardcore Dirty rap Gangsta rap Mafioso rap Horrorcore Memphis rap Hyphy Jerkin' Instrumental Latin Chicano rap Lofi Miami bass Mumble rap Nerdcore Chap hop Political Conscious Progressive rap Religious Christian Jewish Snap music Southern Trap music Afro trap Drill Brooklyn drill UK drill Latin trap Phonk Tread UK trap Turntablism Underground Fusion genres General Country rap Electro Emo rap Hip hop soul Hip house Industrial Jazz rap New jack swing Pop rap Punk rap Ragga Rap opera Rap rock Rap metal Trap metal Rapcore Trip hop Regional Afroswing Bongo flava Boomba music Cumbia rap Genge Hip hop galsen Hipco Hiplife Igbo rap Kwaito Low bap Merenhouse Motswako Na mele paleoleo Nuyorican rap Romany hip hop Songo-salsa Stronda Urban Pasifika Vigilante rap Zenji flava Derivatives Electronic Breakbeat Baltimore club Florida breaks Ghetto house Ghettotech Glitch hop Grime Illbient Latin freestyle Wonky Other Funk carioca Nu metal Reggaeton Alternative reggaeton Regional scenes African Algerian Angolan Beninese Botswana Gambian Ghanaian Ivorian Kenyan Mauritian Moroccan Namibian Nigerian Port Harcourt Nigerien Senegalese South African Tanzanian Togolese Zambian Zimbabwean Asian Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Burmese Chinese Hong Kong Indian Desi Indonesian Japanese Korean Malaysian Nepalese Pakistani Philippine Singapore Sri Lankan Taiwanese Thai European Albanian Austrian Belgian Bosnian and Herzegovinian British Celtic Leeds Scottish Bulgarian Croatian Czech Dutch Finnish French German Greek Portuguese Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Macedonian Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Romanian Romany Russian Serbian Slovak Slovenian Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle Eastern Arabic Egyptian Iranian Israeli Lebanese Palestinian Saudi Arabian Tunisian Turkish Yemeni North American United States: East Coast Baltimore New Jersey New York Philadelphia Washington, D.C. Midwest Chicago Detroit Minneapolis/St. Paul Omaha Southern Atlanta Memphis Miami West Coast Northwest Asian American Latino Native American Outside the US: Canadian Cuban Dominican Haitian Mexican Salvadoran Oceanic Australian New Zealand South American Brazilian Brasília Chilean Colombian Other topics Auto-Tune Contemporary R&B Disc jockey DJ mixer Record player Turntablism Drum machine Sampler Synthesizer Music sequencer Category v t e House music Subgenres Specific Acid house New beat Ambient house Bass house Ballroom Deep house Disco house Diva house Hardbag Electro house Big room house Complextro Fidget house Funky house Future house Garage house Ghetto house Ghettotech Juke house Hip house Jazz house Melodic house Microhouse Moombahton Moombahcore Moombahsoul Nu-disco Outsider house Progressive house Slap house Soulful house Tech house Tribal house Tropical house UK hard house Hard NRG Pumping house Hardbass Scouse house Regional Afro house Amapiano Gqom Kidandali Kwaito Balearic beat Baltimore club Brazilian bass Changa tuki Chicago hard house Chicago house Dutch house Eurohouse French house Italo house Jersey club Latin house Melbourne bounce New Jersey sound Related topics Genres Bassline Big beat Chill-out Disco Dream trance Electro swing Eurodance Footwork Jungle terror Hard dance Madchester (Baggy) Nu jazz Techno Witch house Dance moves Jacking Footwork Other DJ Nightclub Rave v t e Music industry Major companies and organisations Representatives ARIA BVMI BPI Music Canada FIMI IFPI (worldwide) PMB PROMUSICAE RIAA SNEP Music publishers BMG Rights Management Music catalog Sony Music Publishing Universal Music Publishing Group Warner Chappell Music Record labels Major: Sony Universal Warner Independent: Concord Independent UK record labels AAMG Retailers Amazon Digital music stores (iTunes Store) Fnac HMV Trans World Entertainment Virgin Megastores Live music CTS Eventim Live Nation LiveStyle Ticketmaster Major popular genres Avant-garde Blues Contemporary R&B Country Crossover Dance Disco Drum and bass Easy listening Electronica Experimental Folk Funk Gospel Hip hop Instrumental Jazz Latin Metal Motown New Age Operatic pop Pop Punk Reggae Rock Soul Soundtrack World Sectors and roles Album cover design Artists and repertoire (A&R) Disc jockey Distribution Entertainment law Music education Music executive Music journalism Music publisher Music store Music venue Musical instruments Professional audio store Promotion Radio promotion Record label Record shop Road crew Talent manager Tour promoter Production Arrangement Songwriter Composer Lyricist Conductor Disc jockey Hip hop producer Horn section Record producer Rhythm section Orchestrator Session musician Backup singer Ghost singer Vocal coach Ghostwriter Sound engineer Release formats Single (Extended play (EP), 12" single, Cassette single, CD single, Maxi single) Album Double album Music video Promotional recording Phonograph record Eight-track Compact cassette CD DVD Airplay Music download Streaming media Live shows Concert Concert tour Concert residency Music festival Music competition Charts ARIA Charts Billboard Hot 100 Billboard Argentina Hot 100 Brasil Hot 100 Airplay Canadian Hot 100 Gaon Music Chart G-Music Chart Irish Singles Chart Italian Singles Chart GfK Entertainment Charts Entertainment Monitoring Africa Oricon Charts New Zealand Singles Chart Rolling Stone Top 100 Sino Chart SNEP Singles Chart Sverigetopplistan UK Singles Chart Publications Billboard HitQuarters Hot Press Kerrang! Mojo Musica e dischi NME Q Rolling Stone Smash Hits Top of the Pops Television Channels Channel V CMT Fuse Mnet MTV MTV2 Tr3s MuchMusic The Music Factory Viva VH1 The Country Network Series Idol franchise Popstars Star Academy The Four The Voice The X Factor Rising Star Achievements Music award Best-selling music artists Best-selling albums by country Best-selling singles Highest-grossing concert tours Highest-attended concerts Global Recording Artist of the Year Other Album era Album-equivalent unit A-side and B-side Backmasking Bootleg recording Christian music industry Hidden track Largest recorded music markets Music certification Record sales Surprise album White label Category Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) 2 National libraries United States Japan Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Disc_jockey&oldid=1056427154" Categories: Audio mixing Broadcasting occupations Disco DJing Mass media occupations Occupations in music Radio presenters Hip hop production Turntablism Underground culture Electronic dance music 1930s neologisms Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 Articles to be split from May 2020 All articles to be split Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Curlie links Articles with GND identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with multiple identifiers Articles containing video clips Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Languages ??????? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Galego ??? ??????? Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ????? ??????? ??????? Kiswahili ???????? Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? ???? Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ???? ????? ?????? ?????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ??????? Shqip Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? ?????? ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 21 November 2021, at 18:55 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement