https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freediving Freediving - Wikipedia Freediving From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Underwater diving without breathing apparatus Freediver with monofin, ascending Freediving, free-diving, free diving, breath-hold diving, or skin diving is a form of underwater diving that relies on breath-holding until resurfacing rather than the use of breathing apparatus such as scuba gear. Besides the limits of breath-hold, immersion in water and exposure to high ambient pressure also have physiological effects that limit the depths and duration possible in freediving. Examples of freediving activities are traditional fishing techniques, competitive and non-competitive freediving, competitive and non-competitive spearfishing and freediving photography, synchronised swimming, underwater football, underwater rugby, underwater hockey, underwater target shooting and snorkeling. There are also a range of "competitive apnea" disciplines; in which competitors attempt to attain great depths, times, or distances on a single breath. Historically, the term free diving was also used to refer to scuba diving, due to the freedom of movement compared with surface supplied diving.[1][2][3] Contents 1 History 2 Freediving activities 2.1 Recreational hunting and gathering 2.1.1 Spearfishing 2.1.2 Collection of shellfish 2.2 Breathing techniques, relaxation and inspiration 2.3 Competitive breath-hold watersports 2.3.1 Aquathlon 2.3.2 Competitive spearfishing 2.3.3 Synchronised swimming 2.3.4 Underwater hockey 2.3.5 Underwater football 2.3.6 Underwater rugby 2.3.7 Underwater target shooting 3 Competitive apnea 3.1 Disciplines 3.2 World records 3.2.1 AIDA recognized world records 3.2.2 CMAS recognized world records 3.2.3 Guinness recognized world records 4 Recreational 5 Physiology 6 Techniques 6.1 Ascent 7 Training 8 Safety 8.1 Hazards 8.2 Risk 8.3 Statistics and notable accidents 9 Fiction and documentaries 9.1 Documentaries 9.2 Fiction 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links History[edit] See also: Sponge diving and Pearl hunting Natural sponges have been harvested by freedivers near the Greek island of Kalymnos since at least the time of Plato. In ancient times freediving without the aid of mechanical devices was the only possibility, with the exception of the occasional use of reeds and leather breathing bladders.[4] The divers faced the same problems as divers today, such as decompression sickness and blacking out during a breath hold. Freediving was practiced in ancient cultures to gather food, harvest resources such as sponge and pearl, reclaim sunken valuables, and to help aid military campaigns. In Ancient Greece, both Plato and Homer mention the sponge as being used for bathing. The island of Kalymnos was a main centre of diving for sponges. By using weights (skandalopetra) of as much as 15 kilograms (33 lb) to speed the descent, breath-holding divers would descend to depths up to 30 metres (98 ft) to collect sponges.[5] Harvesting of red coral was also done by divers.[citation needed] The Mediterranean had large amounts of maritime trade. As a result of shipwrecks, particularly in the fierce winter storms, divers were often hired to salvage whatever they could from the seabed.[6] Divers would swim down to the wreck and choose the most valuable pieces to salvage. Divers were also used in warfare. Defenses against sea vessels were often created, such as underwater barricades, and hence divers were often used to scout out the seabed when ships were approaching an enemy harbor. If barricades were found, it was divers who were used to disassemble them, if possible.[7] During the Peloponnesian War, divers were used to get past enemy blockades to relay messages as well as supplies to allies or troops that were cut off,[8] and in 332 BC, during the Siege of Tyre, the city used divers to cut the anchor cables of Alexander's attacking ships.[9] In Japan, ama divers began to collect pearls about 2,000 years ago.[10][11] For thousands of years, most seawater pearls were retrieved by divers working in the Indian Ocean, in areas such as the Persian Gulf, the Red Sea, and in the Gulf of Mannar (between Sri Lanka and India).[12] A fragment of Isidore of Charax's Parthian itinerary was preserved in Athenaeus's 3rd-century Sophists at Dinner, recording freediving for pearls around an island in the Persian Gulf.[13] Pearl divers near the Philippines were also successful at harvesting large pearls, especially in the Sulu Archipelago. At times, the largest pearls belonged by law to the sultan, and selling them could result in the death penalty for the seller. Nonetheless, many pearls made it out of the archipelago by stealth, ending up in the possession of the wealthiest families in Europe.[14] Pearling was popular in Qatar, Bahrain, Japan, and India. The Gulf of Mexico was also known for pearling. Native Americans harvested freshwater pearls from lakes and rivers like the Ohio, Tennessee, and Mississippi, while others dived for marine pearls from the Caribbean and waters along the coasts of Central and South America. In 1940, Dottie Frazier pioneered freediving for women in the United States and also began teaching classes. It was also during this time that she began to design and sell rubber suits for Navy UDT divers.[15] Freediving activities[edit] Recreational hunting and gathering[edit] Spearfishing[edit] Spearfishing is an ancient method of fishing that has been used throughout the world for millennia. Early civilizations were familiar with the custom of spearing fish from rivers and streams using sharpened sticks. Today modern spearfishing makes use of elastic powered spearguns and slings, or compressed gas pneumatic powered spearguns, to strike the hunted fish. Specialised techniques and equipment have been developed for various types of aquatic environments and target fish. Spearfishing may be done using free-diving, snorkelling, or scuba diving techniques. Spearfishing while using scuba equipment is illegal in some countries. The use of mechanically powered spearguns is also outlawed in some countries and jurisdictions.[citation needed] Spearfishing is highly selective, normally uses no bait and has no by-catch. Collection of shellfish[edit] Breathing techniques, relaxation and inspiration[edit] Beside all the underwater activities, there is a trend in using the sea and nature as a medium and source of inspiration for rediscover of mindfulness.[16] Non competitive breathing techniques and relaxation before the dive and visualization under water are practiced. Mermaid diving also focuses on the beauty under water.[17] Competitive breath-hold watersports[edit] Aquathlon[edit] Aquathlon (also known as underwater wrestling) is an underwater sport where two competitors wearing masks and fins wrestle underwater in an attempt to remove a ribbon from each other's ankle band in order to win the bout. The "combat" takes place in a 5-metre (16 ft) square ring within a swimming pool, and is made up of three 30-second rounds, with a fourth round played in the event of a tie. The sport originated during the 1980s in the former USSR (now Russia) and was first played at international level in 1993. It was recognised by the Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) in 2008.[18][19][20][21] Competitive spearfishing[edit] Competitive spearfishing is defined by the world governing body CMAS as "the hunting and capture of fish underwater without the aid of artificial breathing devices, using gear that depends entirely on the physical strength of the competitor." They publish a set of competition rules that are used by affiliated organisations.[22][23] Synchronised swimming[edit] A member of the Japanese team is thrown up in the air by other members under the water during the team's free routine at the 2013 French Open. Synchronized swimming is a hybrid form of swimming, dance, and gymnastics, consisting of swimmers (either solos, duets, trios, combos, or teams) performing a synchronized routine of elaborate moves in the water, accompanied by music. Synchronized swimming demands advanced water skills, and requires great strength, endurance, flexibility, grace, artistry and precise timing, as well as exceptional breath control when upside down underwater. During lifts swimmers are not allowed to touch the bottom.[citation needed] Traditionally it was a women's sport, but following the addition of a new mixed-pair event, FINA World Aquatics competitions are open to men since the 16th 2015 championships in Kazan, and the other international and national competitions allow male competitors in every event. However, men are currently still barred from competing in the Olympics. Both USA Synchro and Synchro Canada allow men to compete with women. Most European countries also allow men to compete, and France even allows male only podiums, according to the number of participants. In the past decade, more men are becoming involved in the sport and a global biannual competition called Men's Cup has been steadily growing.[citation needed] Swimmers perform two routines for the judges, one technical and one free, as well as age group routines and figures. Synchronized swimming is both an individual and team sport. Swimmers compete individually during figures, and then as a team during the routine. Figures are made up of a combination of skills and positions that often require control, strength, and flexibility. Swimmers are ranked individually for this part of the competition. The routine involves teamwork and synchronization. It is choreographed to music and often has a theme. Synchronized swimming is governed internationally by FINA (Fédération Internationale de Natation). Underwater hockey[edit] Two players compete for the puck in underwater hockey Underwater Hockey, (also called Octopush (mainly in the United Kingdom)) is a globally played limited-contact sport in which two teams compete to manoeuvre a puck across the bottom of a swimming pool into the opposing team's goal by propelling it with a pusher. It originated in England in 1954 when Alan Blake, the founder of the newly formed Southsea Sub-Aqua Club, invented the game he called Octopush as a means of keeping the club's members interested and active over the cold winter months when open-water diving lost its appeal.[24] Underwater Hockey is now played worldwide, with the Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques, abbreviated CMAS, as the world governing body.[25] The first Underwater Hockey World Championship was held in Canada in 1980 after a false start in 1979 brought about by international politics and apartheid.[citation needed] Underwater football[edit] US Navy Students playing underwater football Underwater football is a two-team underwater sport that shares common elements with underwater hockey and underwater rugby. As with both of those games, it is played in a swimming pool with snorkeling equipment (mask, snorkel, and fins). The goal of the game is to manoeuvre (by carrying and passing) a slightly negatively buoyant ball from one side of a pool to the other by players who are completely submerged underwater. Scoring is achieved by placing the ball (under control) in the gutter on the side of the pool. Variations include using a toy rubber torpedo as the ball, and weighing down buckets to rest on the bottom and serve as goals.[citation needed] It is played in the Canadian provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Newfoundland and Labrador, and Saskatchewan.[26] Underwater rugby[edit] Underwater rugby is an underwater team sport. During a match two teams try to score a negatively buoyant ball (filled with saltwater) into the opponents’ goal at the bottom of a swimming pool. It originated from within the physical fitness training regime existing in German diving clubs during the early 1960s and has little in common with rugby football except for the name. It was recognised by the Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) in 1978 and was first played as a world championship in 1980.[citation needed] Underwater target shooting[edit] Underwater target shooting is an underwater sport that tests a competitors’ ability to accurately use a speargun via a set of individual and team events conducted in a swimming pool using free diving or apnea technique. The sport was developed in France during the early 1980s and is currently practised mainly in Europe. It is known as Tir sur cible subaquatique in French and as Tiro al Blanco Subacuático in Spanish. Competitive apnea[edit] Monofin freediver Competitive freediving is currently governed by two world associations: AIDA International (International Association for Development of Apnea)[27] and CMAS (Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques – World Underwater Federation). Historically, there were two more organisations that regulated freediving records and activities - IAFD (International Association of Freedivers) and FREE (Freediving Regulations and Education Entity).[28][29] Each organization has its own rules on recognizing a record attempt which can be found on the organization's website. Alongside competitive disciplines there are record disciplines - disciplines that are not held in competitions, that are just for setting world records. There is a third organization which in addition to AIDA and CMAS preside over those record disciplines and that is Guinness.[citation needed] Almost all types of competitive freediving have in common that it is an individual sport based on the best individual achievement. Exceptions to this rule are the bi-annual World Championship for Teams held by AIDA, where the combined score of the team members makes up the team's total points and Skandalopetra diving competitions held by CMAS, the only truly ‘team’ event in freediving - for which teams are formed by two athletes: one acting as an apneista (Voutichtis; diver) and the other acting as an assistant (Kolaouzeris; person who "extracts"). Disciplines[edit] There are currently eleven recognized disciplines defined by AIDA and CMAS, and a dozen more that are only practiced locally.[clarification needed][citation needed] All disciplines can be practiced by both men and women and only CMAS currently separates records in fresh water from those at sea. The disciplines of AIDA can be done both in competition and as a record attempt, with the exception of Variable Weight and No limits, which are both solely for record attempts. For all AIDA depth disciplines, the depth the athlete will attempt is announced before the dive; this is accepted practice for both competition and record attempts. Most divers choose monofin over bifins where there is a choice. Discipline Measure­ment AIDA[30] CMAS[31] Description open water pool open water pool CWT – Constant weight apnea depth Y – Y – Maximum depth following a guide line. The line to act solely as a guide and only a single hold of the rope to stop the descent and start the ascent is permitted. Dropping dive weights is not permitted. Both bi-fins and monofin are permitted and the technique is irrelevant. CWT BF, CWTB – Constant weight apnea with bifins depth Y – Y – As for CWT above but monofins are not permitted and the athlete is prohibited to use a dolphin kick for his / her propulsion. CNF – Constant weight apnea without fins depth Y – Y – As for CWT above but no swimming aids such as fins are permitted. This discipline is the most recently recognised discipline having been recognised by AIDA since 2003. DNF – Dynamic apnea without fins horizontal distance – Y Y Y Maximum distance underwater, in a pool, no swimming aids such as fins are permitted (AIDA). DYN – Dynamic apnea with fins horizontal distance – Y Y Y Maximum horizontal distance on one breath in a pool. Monofin or bi-fins are permitted and the technique is irrelevant. DYN BF, DYNB – Dynamic apnea with bifins horizontal distance – Y – Y Same as DYN above but monofins are not permitted and the athlete is prohibited to use a dolphin kick for his / her propulsion. FIM – Free immersion apnea depth Y – Y – Maximum depth following a vertical line. The line may be used to pull down to depth and back to the surface. No ballast or fins are permitted. It is known for its ease compared with the Constant Weight disciplines, while still not permitting the release of weights. JB – Jump blue, (also the cube) horizontal distance N Y – Maximum distance covered around a 15-metre square at a depth of 10 metres. Monofin, bi-fins or no fins are all permitted. Sled may be used for descent. NLT – No-limits apnea depth Y – N Any means of breath-hold diving to depth and return to the surface is permitted provided that a guideline is used to measure the distance. Most divers use a weighted sled to descend and an inflatable bag to ascend. Skandalopetra depth & min. time N Y – The only true team event in freediving. Diver 1 descends, usually assisted by a stone or marble slab attached to a rope, while Diver 2 waits on the surface. Diver 1 reaches the target depth and is hauled to the surface by Diver 2 using only muscle power. No diving mask, suit or fins are permitted, only nose clip. STA – Static apnea max. time Y Y Y Y Timed breathhold endurance while floating on the surface or standing on the bottom. Usually in a pool. STA O2 – Static apnea with pure oxygen max. time N N Timed breathhold endurance, pre-breathing 100% oxygen for up to 30 minutes prior to the breathhold is permitted. Usually in a pool. Although no longer recognised by either AIDA or CMAS there were three instances of records being approved by AIDA. S&E Apnea – Speed-Endurance Apnea[32] min. time N – Y Shortest time over a fixed, underwater distance. An endurance sub-discipline is swum in fractions of a pool length alternating apnoea swimming with passive recovery at the intervals. Disciplines are SPE – 100m speed apnoea, END 16x50 – 800m and END 8x50 – 400m endurance apnoea. VNF – Variable weight apnea without fins depth N Y – Descent is assisted by a weighted sled sliding down a line, the ascent may be by pulling up along the line or swimming without fins. VWT – Variable weight apnea depth Y – Y – Descent is assisted by a weighted sled sliding down a line, the ascent may be either by: 1.) pulling up along the line or swimming with or without fins under AIDA rules 2.) swimming with fins under CMAS rules. Herbert Nitsch, World Record Holder Freediver Overview of the above disciplines [33][34][32] BF - BiFins, MF - MonoFin Discipline Aids permitted Weight change permitted? Descent Ascent CNF None or weight None No CWT BF / MF and/or weight BF / MF No CWT BF BF and/or weight BF No DNF x x x DYN x x x DYN BF x x x FIM Rope or none Rope or none No JB Sled and/or BF / MF or none BF / MF or none Sled only NLT Any Any Yes Skandalopetra Stone Hauled up Yes STA x x x STA O2 x x x S&E Apnoea x x x VNF Sled Rope or none Yes VWT Sled BF / MF or rope Yes World records[edit] Note 1: Best official result in STA is Guinness WR of 11:54 by Branko Petrovi? in 2014, a freediver who has results in STA over 10 minutes under both AIDA and CMAS. Note 2: Best NLT result is 253.2m by Herbert Nitsch in 2012; intention of having the dive sanctioned by AIDA fell through due to a sponsoring conflict. Note 3: After 2001-12-31 AIDA International no longer separated the records achieved in a lake from those in the sea. AIDA recognized world records[edit] The AIDA recognized world records are:[35][36] Discipline Gender Depth [m] Distance [m] Time Name Date Place Static apnea (STA) Men – – 11 min 35 sec  Stéphane Mifsud (FRA) 2009-06-08 Hyères, Var, France Women – – 9 min 02 sec  Natalia Molchanova (RUS) 2013-06-29 Belgrade, Serbia Dynamic apnea with fins (DYN) Men – 316,53 –  Mateusz Malina (POL)[37] 2019-06-22 Turku, Finland Women – 257 –  Magdalena Solich-Talanda (POL) 2019-10-13 Vienna, Austria Dynamic apnea with bifins (DYNB) Men – 250 –  Mateusz Malina (POL) 2019-10-13 Vienna, Austria Women – 208 –  Kardasevic Mirela (CRO) 2019-03-07 Moscow, Russia Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Men – 244 –  Mateusz Malina (POL) 2016-07-02 Turku, Finland Women – 191 –  Magdalena Solich-Talanda (POL) 2017-07-01 Opole, Poland Constant weight apnea (CWT) Men 130 – –  Alexey Molchanov (RUS) 2018-07-18 Dean's Blue Hole, Long Island Bahamas Women 114 – –  Alenka Artnik (SVN)[38] 2020-11-13 Sharm el-Sheikh, Red sea, Egypt Constant weight apnea with bifins (CWTB) Men 110 – –  Alexey Molchanov (RUS) 2019-08-05 West Bay Roatan, Honduras Women 93 – –  Nataliia Zharkova (UKR) 2019-8-10 West Bay Roatan, Honduras Constant weight apnea without fins (CNF) Men 102 – –  William Trubridge (NZL) 2016-07-20 Dean's Blue Hole, Long Island Bahamas Women 73 – –  Alessia Zecchini (ITA) 2016-04-26 Dean's Blue Hole, Long Island Bahamas Free immersion apnea (FIM) Men 125 – –  Alexey Molchanov (RUS) 2018-07-24 Dean's Blue Hole, Long Island Bahamas Women 98 – –  Alessia Zecchini (ITA) 2019-10-16 Willemstad, Curaçao Variable weight apnea (VWT) Men 146 – –  Stavros Kastrinakis (GRE) 2015-11-01 Kalamata, Greece Women 130 – –  Nanja van den Broek (NED) 2015-10-18 Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt No-limits apnea (NLT) Men 253.2 – –  Herbert Nitsch (AUT) 2012-06-06 Santorini, Greece Women 160 – –  Tanya Streeter (UK) 2002-08-17 Turks and Caicos Discipline Gender Points Team / Individual Date Place AIDA team Men 840.6  CRO Goran ?olak, Božidar Petani, Veljano Zanki 2012-09-16 Nice, France [39][40] Women Men 313.3  William Trubridge (NZL) 2010-07-06 Okinawa, Japan [41][42] Women CMAS recognized world records[edit] As of 16 September 2020[update], the CMAS recognized world records are:[43] AIDA equivalent Discipline Gender Depth [m] Distance [m] Time Name/Country Date Place — SPE – Speed 100 m apnea with fins (50 m pool) Men – – 00:31.710  Stefano Konjedic (ITA) Women – – 00:35.860  Vera Yarovitskaya (RUS) — END 16x50 – Endurance 800 m apnea with fins (50 m pool) Men – – 09:34.270  Max Poschart (GER) Women – – 11:20.290  Martina Mongiardino (ITA) — END 8x50 – Endurance 400 m apnea with fins (50 m pool) Men – – Women – – 4:55.390  Martina Mongiardino (ITA) 2017-04-20 Novara, Italy STA Static apnea Men – – 10:39.000  Branko Petrovi? (SRB) 2015-07-30 Mulhouse, France Women – – 08:53.150  Veronika Dittes (AUT) — Dynamic apnea with fins (under ice) Men – 175 –  Arthur Guérin-Boëri (FRA) 2017-03-11 Lake Sonnanen, Finland Women – 125 –  Valentina Cafolla (CRO) 2017-03-12 Lago Di Anterselva Lake[44] — (open water) Men – 200 –  Sertan Aydin (TUR) Women – – DYN (50 m pool) Men – 300.00 –  Arthur Guérin-Boëri (FRA) 2016-06-11 Lignano, Italy Women – 250.00 –  Alessia Zecchini (ITA) 2016-06-11 Lignano, Italy DYNB DYN BF – Dynamic apnea with bifins (50 m pool) Men – 246.35 –  Andrea Vitturini (ITA) Women – 204.20 –  Alessia Zecchini (ITA) 2016-06- Lignano, Italy DNF Dynamic apnea without fins (50 m pool) Men – 205.97 –  Goran ?olak (CRO) Women – 171.22 –  Alessia Zecchini (ITA) 2016-06-08 Lignano, Italy — (25 m pool) Men – 200 –  Arthur Guérin-Boëri (FRA) 2013-08-09 Kazan, Russia Women – 175 –  Katarina Zub?i? (HRV) 2013-11-15 Zagreb, Croatia — Jump blue apnea with fins (at sea) Men – 201.61 –  Arthur Guérin-Boëri (FRA) 2015-10-09 Ischia, Italy Women – 190.48 –  Alessia Zecchini (ITA) 2015-10-09 Ischia, Italy (fresh water) Men – 170 –  Alfredo Leonidas Rosado Estrada (ECU) Women – 132.92 –  Gilda Rivadeneria Montalvo (ECU) CWT Constant weight with fins (at sea) Men 122 – –  Alexey Molchanov (RUS) Women 95 – –  Alenka Artnik (SLO) (fresh water) Men 80 – –  Michele Tomasi (ITA) Women 57 – –  Tanya Streeter (UK) 1998-12-28 Ocala, Fl, USA CWTB CWT BF – Constant weight with bifins (at sea) Men 112 – –  Arnaud Jérald (FRA) 2020-09-16 Kalamata, Greece Women 85 – –  Alenka Artnik (SLO)  Nataliia Zharkova (UKR) 2017- (fresh water) Men 75 – –  Michele Tomasi (ITA) Women – – CNF Constant weight without fins (at sea) Men 83 – –  Goran ?olak (CRO) 2017-10-04 Ka?, Turkey Women 65 – –  Nataliia Zharkova (UKR) (fresh water) Men 65 – –  Michal Rišian (CZE) 2016-07-10 Weyregg, Austria Women – – – – – – FIM Free immersion apnea (at sea) Men 81 – –  Devrim Cenk Ulusoy (TUR) 2012-09-25 Ka?, Turkey Women 72 – –  ?ahika Ercümen (TUR) 2014-07-24 Ka?, Turkey VWT Variable weight apnea with fins (at sea) Men 131 – –  Homer Leuci (ITA) 2012-09-11 Soverato, Italy Women 111 – –  Derya Can (TUR) VNF – Variable weight apnea without fins (at sea) Men 130 – –  Ufuk Kocak (TUR) Women 94 – –  Derya Can (TUR) — Skandalopetra (at sea) Men 112 – –  Andreas Güldner (GER) 2014-06-26 Red Sea, Egypt Women 68.9 – –  Karol Meyer (BRA) 2012 Bonaire, Caribbean Guinness recognized world records[edit] Note: Only those disciplines that are modifications of existing AIDA or CMAS disciplines and Guinness-exclusive (as it recognizes and inherits some AIDA/CMAS records) or Guinness-conceived (CMAS and AIDA do/did sanction at some time) disciplines. As of 25 February 2018[update] Discipline Gender Depth [m] Distance [m] Time Name Date Place STA O2 Men – – 24:11  Budimir Šobat (CRO) 24 February 2018 Zagreb Women – – 18:32  Karol Meyer (BRA) 10 July 2009 Florianopolis DYN under ice Men – 175 – details under CMAS world records Women – 125 – DNF under ice Men – 84 –  Nik Linder (GER) Feb 2013 Weissensee [45][46] Women – – DNF under ice (no diving suit) Men – 76.2 –  Stig Severinsen (DEN) Apr 2013 Qordlortoq Lake [47][48] Women – 50 –  Johanna Nordblad (FIN) Mar 2015 Päijänne [49] NLT under ice Men 65 – –  Andreas Pap (SRB) Feb 2013 Weissensee [45] Women – – Recreational[edit] Recreational freediving in Dahab Freediving as a recreational activity is widely practiced and differs significantly from scuba diving. Although there are potential risks to all freediving, it can be safely practiced using a wide range of skill levels from the average snorkeler to the professional freediver. Compared to scuba diving, freediving offers:[citation needed] Freedom from cumbersome equipment and short preparation times. Low cost. It is quiet and does not disturb fish, the noise of breathing and bubbles can be quite loud on open circuit scuba though rebreathers are much quieter. Mobility and speed, but for a much more limited period. No decompression time for deep dives, although it is possible to get decompression sickness, or taravana, from repetitive deep free-diving with short surface intervals.[50] The lack of exhaled air bubbles on ascent gives greater visibility on ascent. Accessibility, if the site can be walked to it can, potentially, be dived. Appropriately skilled and fit freedivers can go as deep, or deeper than, recreational scuba divers, the depth being limited only by the willingness to accept the risks; scuba diving is restricted by the level of certification. Freshwater springs, often with excellent visibility, provide good freediving opportunities but with greater risks.[citation needed] Diving into spring caverns with restricted access to the surface is very different from diving in open water. The time available to a freediver to solve problems underwater before hypoxia sets in is severely restricted in comparison with scuba. Freediving into confined cave systems such as Eagle's Nest Cave, Florida and Blue Springs State Park, Florida has resulted in several deaths. Cave freediving is commonly discouraged in basic freediver safety training. Physiology[edit] See also: Human physiology of underwater diving This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (July 2017) The human body has several oxygen-conserving adaptations that manifest under diving conditions as part of the mammalian diving reflex. The adaptations include: Reflex bradycardia: Significant drop in heart rate. Blood-shift: Blood flow and volume is redistributed towards vital organs by means of a reflex vasoconstriction. Blood vessels distend and become engorged, which in the case of the pulmonary capillaries assists with pressure compensation that comes with increasing diving depth, and without which a largely air-filled chest cavity would simply collapse for lack of compliance.[citation needed] Body-cooling: peripheral vasoconstriction results in cooling of peripheral tissue beds, which lower their oxygen demand in a thermodynamic manner. In addition, Murat et al. (2013) recently discovered that breath-holding results in prompt and substantial brain cooling, just like in diving birds and seals. (Dry) breath-holds result in cooling on the order of about 1 °C/minute, but this is likely to be greater with cold water submersion, in proportion to the magnitude and promptness of the dive response.[citation needed] Splenic contraction: Releasing red blood cells carrying oxygen.[51] Techniques[edit] See also: Skandalopetra diving Breath-holding ability, and hence dive performance, is a function of on-board oxygen stores, scope for metabolic rate reduction, efficient oxygen utilization, and hypoxia tolerance.[52] Athletes attempt to accomplish this in various ways. Some divers use "packing", which increases lung volume beyond normal total lung capacity.[53] In addition, training is allocated to enhance blood and muscle oxygen stores, to a limited extent.[clarification needed] Most divers rely on increasing fitness by increasing lung capacity. Simple breath-holding practice is highly effective for increasing lung capacity. In an interview on the radio talk show Fresh Air, journalist James Nestor, author of the book Breath: The New Science of a Lost Art,[54] stated: "Some divers have a lung capacity of 14 liters, which is about double the size for a typical adult male. They weren't born this way. ... They trained themselves to breathe in ways to profoundly affect their physical bodies."[55] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (October 2019) Ascent[edit] See also: Skandalopetra diving This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (October 2019) Training[edit] Training for freediving can take many forms, some of which can be performed on land.The University of Miami presents a scientific freediving class that was developed by Claire Paris, a professor and freediver,[56] the class is the first of its kind at the university.[57][58] One example is the apnea walk. This consists of a preparation "breathe-up", followed by a short (typically 1 minute) breath hold taken at rest. Without breaking the hold, participants then begin walking as far as possible until it becomes necessary to breathe again. Athletes can do close to 400 meters in training this way.[citation needed] This form of training is good for accustoming muscles to work under anaerobic conditions, and for tolerance to CO2 build-up in the circulation. It is also easy to gauge progress, as increasing distance can be measured.[citation needed] Before competition attempts, freedivers perform a preparation sequence, which usually consists of physical stretching, mental exercise and breath exercise. It may include a succession of variable length static apnea and special purging deep breaths. Results of the preparation sequence are slower metabolism, lower heart rate and breath rate, and lower levels of carbon dioxide in the bloodstream[59] and overall mental equilibrium.[citation needed] Safety[edit] Hazards[edit] See also: Diving hazards § The diving environment, and Diving hazards § Hazards inherent in the diver The most obvious hazard is lack of access to air for breathing – a necessity for human life. This can result in asphyxia from drowning if the diver does not reach the surface while still capable of holding their breath and resuming breathing. The risk depends on several factors, including the depth, duration and shape of the dive profile. Latent hypoxia is a specific hazard of deeper freedives. This effect can cause hypoxic blackout during surfacing. There are also a wide range of environmental hazards possible specific to the site and water and weather conditions at the time of diving, and there may be other hazards specific to the freediving activity. This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (October 2018) Risk[edit] See also: Freediving blackout Failing to respond to physiological warning signals, or crossing the mental barrier by strong will, may lead to blackout underwater or on reaching the surface.[10][60] Trained freedivers are well aware of this and competitions must be held under strict supervision and with competent first-aiders on standby.[61] However, this does not eliminate the risk of blackout. Freedivers are encouraged by certification and sporting organisations to dive only with a 'buddy' who accompanies them, observing from in the water at the surface, and ready to dive to the rescue if the diver loses consciousness during the ascent. This is only reasonably practicable if the water clarity allows observation, and the buddy is capable of safely reaching the diver.[citation needed] Due to the nature of the sport, the risks of freediving can be reduced by strict adherence to safety measures as an integral part of the activity, but cannot be eliminated entirely. Competition rules may require all participants to be adept in rescue and resuscitation.[citation needed] Statistics and notable accidents[edit] Nicholas Mevoli, a diver from New York died on 17 November 2013 after losing consciousness on surfacing from a 3-minute 38 second dive to a depth of 72 metres during an official record attempt in the "constant weight without fins" event. He had previously reached greater depths and longer times in other disciplines.[62] Fiction and documentaries[edit] See also: Underwater diving in popular culture Documentaries[edit] Ocean Men (2001) is a documentary film about the art and science of freediving, featuring two of its most outstanding exponents: Francisco "Pipín" Ferreras and Umberto Pelizzari.[63] My Pilot, Whale (2014) is a short documentary film directed by Alexander and Nicole Gratovsky, demonstrating direct communication between a human and free pilot whales in the open ocean. The entire underwater part was shot without underwater breathing equipment; both the operator and the person appearing in the frame are freediving.[64] Fiction[edit] In the film Mission Impossible - Rogue Nation, Tom Cruise plays super spy Ethan Hunt fighting the forces of evil, and goes freediving in a scene to expose the villains. The Pearl by John Steinbeck (1947) is a novel about a poor pearl diver, Kino, who finds the 'Pearl of Heaven', which is exceptionally valuable, changing his life forever. The novel explores themes of man's nature as well as greed and evil. In South Sea Adventure (1952) by Willard Price the Hunt brothers, marooned on a coral island, use free diving to collect both pearls and fresh water.[clarification needed] In Ian Fleming's (1964) James Bond novel You Only Live Twice, the character Kissy Suzuki is an ama diver. This connection was also mentioned in the film version. Man from Atlantis was a 1970s TV series which featured a superhero with the ability to breathe underwater and freedive in his own special way. The Big Blue (1988) is a romantic film about two world-class freedivers, a heavily fictionalized depiction of the rivalry of freedivers Jacques Mayol and Enzo Maiorca. In the movie Phoenix Blue (2001), protagonist Rick is a musician who freedives competitively. The children's novel The Dolphins of Laurentum by Caroline Lawrence (2003), which takes place in ancient Rome, describes the applications of freediving (sponge and pearl diving) and its hazards, as one of the principal characters, as well as the main antagonist, try to beat each other to a sunken treasure. The Freediver (2004) is a film about a talented female freediver who is discovered and brought to an island, where she is trained by an ambitious scientist to break a freediving world record currently held by an American woman. In the film Into the Blue (2005) starring Jessica Alba, a group of divers find themselves in deep trouble with a drug lord after they come upon the illicit cargo of a sunken airplane in the Caribbean. Jessica Alba is an accomplished freediver, and did much of the underwater work; some other stunts were performed by Mehgan Heaney-Grier. In Greg Iles' novel Blood Memory (2005), the main character Cat Ferry is an odontologist and a freediver. H2O: Just Add Water Series 3 added a freediver (Will Benjamin played by Luke Mitchell) as a regular. Freediving is featured in some episodes. The Greater Meaning of Water (2010) is an independent film about competitive constant weight freediving, focusing on the 'zen' of freediving. In the Canadian television series Corner Gas, the character Karen Pelly (Tara Spencer-Nairn) competed in static apnea, ranking fifth in Canada with a personal best of over six minutes. In the American television series Baywatch episode "The Chamber" (Session 2, Episode 17), the character Mitch Buchannon rescues a diver trapped 90 feet below the ocean surface, but almost dies while suffering the effects of decompression sickness; decompression sickness is highly improbable following freediving exposure to this depth. In the book Hornblower and the Atropos, CS Forester's character Horatio Hornblower is tasked by the Royal Navy to retrieve sunken treasure with the help of freediving Sinhalese pearl divers See also[edit] British Freediving Association – British affiliate to AIDA International Nordic Deep – Freediving competition in Lysekil, Sweden Vertical Blue – Freediving competition held annually in The Bahamas at Dean's Blue Hole Skandalopetra diving – Freediving using a stone weight at the end of a rope to the surface Audrey Mestre – French world record-setting freediver Snorkeling – Swimming while breathing through a snorkel References[edit] ^ Rebikoff, Dimitri (1955). Free Diving. Sidgwick & Jackson. ^ Owen, David M. (1955). A Manual for Free-Divers Using Compressed Air. Pergamon. ^ Tailliez, Philippe; Dumas, Frederic; Cousteau, Jacques-Yves; et al. (1957). The Complete Manual of Free Diving. New York: G. P. Putnam's sons. ^ Ivanova, Desislava; Nihrizov, Hristo; Zhekov, Orlin (1999). "The Very Beginning". Human Contact With the Underwater World. Think Quest. Archived from the original on 2009-12-18. Retrieved 2009-09-06. ^ Sandra Hendrikse; André Merks (12 May 2009). "Diving the Skafandro suit". Diving Heritage. Retrieved 16 October 2009. ^ Galili, Ehud; Rosen, Baruch (2008). "Ancient Remotely-Operated Instruments Recovered Under Water off the Israeli Coast". International Journal of Nautical Archaeology. Nautical Archaeology Society. 37 (2): 283–94. doi:10.1111/j.1095-9270.2008.00187.x. S2CID 110312998. ^ Frost, F. J. (1968). "Scyllias: Diving in Antiquity". Greece & Rome. Second Series. Cambridge University Press. 15 (2): 180–5. doi:10.1017/S0017383500017435. ^ Thucydides (2009) [431 BCE]. History of the Peloponnesian War. Translated by Crawley, Richard. ^ Arrian of Nicomedia. "Chapter XXI: Siege of Tyre". The Anabasis of Alexander; or, The History of the Wars and Conquests of Alexander the Great. Translated by Chinnock, E. J. London: Hodder & Stoughton. ^ a b Lundgren, Claus E. G.; Ferrigno, Massimo, eds. (1985). "Physiology of Breath-hold Diving. 31st Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop". UHMS Publication Number 72(WS-BH)4-15-87. Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society. Retrieved 16 April 2009. Cite journal requires |journal= (help) ^ Rahn, H.; Yokoyama, T. (1965). Physiology of Breath-Hold Diving and the Ama of Japan. United States: National Academy of Sciences – National Research Council. p. 369. ISBN 0-309-01341-0. Retrieved 16 April 2009. ^ De Silva, K. M. (1995). History of Ceylon: History of Sri Lanka. 2. Peradeniya: Ceylon University Press. p. 56. ISBN 955-589-004-8. OCLC 952216. ^ ???????? ????????? [Isidore of Charax]. ?? ??? ??????? ???????????? [Tò t?s Parthías Peri?g?tikón, A Journey around Parthia]. c.?1st century AD (in Ancient Greek) in ???????? [Athenaeus]. ?????????????? [Deipnosophistaí, Sophists at Dinner], Book III, 93E. c.?3rd century (in Ancient Greek) Trans. Charles Burton Gulick as Athenaeus, Vol. I, p. 403. Harvard University Press (Cambridge), 1927. Accessed 13 Aug 2014. ^ Streeter's Pearls and pearling life dedicates a chapter to the Sooloo islands. Streeter was one of the leading and most influential English jewelers in the 19th century and outfitted his own schooner the Shree-Pas-Sair which he sailed as well and on which he himself went pearl fishing in 1880. (For an illustration of divers on a schooner, see Pearl fishers obtaining the world's best pearls. Streeter furthermore led a consortium to compete with Baron Rothschild to lease Ruby mines in Burma. ^ Russ. "Dottie Frazier Pioneer/Women". skindivinghistory.com. Retrieved 2018-03-09. ^ "Teammayol". Teammayol. Retrieved 2020-11-16. ^ "Dada Mermaids in a crystal clear Chinese lake - YouTube". www.youtube.com. Retrieved 2020-11-16. ^ "History of Aquathlon". International Aquathlon Association. Archived from the original on 8 June 2004. ^ "Philosophy of the I.A.A". International Aquathlon Association. Archived from the original on 8 June 2004. Retrieved 6 October 2014. ^ Cedeño O., Miguel A. (21 February 2009). "The Aquathlon (Fight Underwater) continues its development in 2009". SPORTALSUB.NET. ^ "Aquatlon". History of CMAS. CMAS. Archived from the original on 2013-05-16. ^ "About Spearfishing". www.cmas.org. World Underwater Federation (CMAS). Retrieved 25 August 2017. ^ "Underwater Fishing (Spear fishing) International Rules - English version". www.cmas.org. World Underwater Federation (CMAS). 23 January 2015. Retrieved 25 August 2017. ^ "The History of Underwater Hockey". www.cmas.org. Archived from the original on 5 April 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2014. ^ "CMAS Underwater Hockey Commission". www.cmas.org. Retrieved 5 August 2014. ^ "Where is it Played". underwaterfootball.com. Retrieved 7 November 2014. ^ McKie, N. (2004). "Freediving in cyberspace". Journal of the South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society. 34: 101–03. Retrieved 5 October 2013. ^ Engelbrecht, Christian (January 2009). "History of freediving". seanomad-freediving.com. Retrieved 9 August 2020. ^ http://www.apneablue.com/?page_id=18[dead link] ^ AIDA International. "AIDA-disciplines". Archived from the original on 20 November 2015. Retrieved 5 August 2015. ^ Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques. "CMAS-disciplines". Retrieved 5 August 2015. ^ a b "Freediving Disciplines Explained". www.deeperblue.com. Retrieved 9 August 2020. ^ "About Free Diving". www.cmas.org. Retrieved 9 August 2020. ^ "Introducing… The Jump Blue - CMAS freediving". www.freedive-earth.com. Retrieved 9 August 2020. ^ AIDA International. "World Records". Archived from the original on 17 August 2016. Retrieved 1 June 2017. ^ "Apnoetauchen Rekorde: Alle Weltrekorde (2020)". apnoetauchen-lernen.de (in German). 2020-01-24. Retrieved 2020-05-28. ^ Klugstedt, Sebastian (2019-12-16). "Apnoetauchen Rekorde: Alle Rekorde (2020) inkl. Video". freitauchen-lernen.com (in German). Retrieved 2020-04-04. ^ https://www.washingtonpost.com/sports/2020/11/13/alenka-artnik-freediving-record/ ^ "Freediving World Team Championship 2012". Aida-worldchampionship.com. Retrieved 2015-04-30. ^ "Freediving World Team Championship 2012". Aida-worldchampionship.com. Retrieved 2020-08-09. ^ "Willian Trubridge"World Freediving Record Holder" signed photograph". www.trademe.co.nz. Retrieved 9 August 2020. ^ "Event Details 7th AIDA Team World Championship 2010". Aida-worldchampionship.com. Retrieved 2020-08-09. ^ Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques. "Apnoea Records". www.cmas.org. Retrieved 14 October 2016. ^ Whelan, Stephan (21 March 2017). "New CMAS World Record For Freediving Under Ice". www.deeperblue.com. Retrieved 13 August 2020. ^ a b "Two new world records under ice for Nik Linder from Freiburg". bonex-systeme.de. Retrieved 9 August 2020. ^ "Rekorde & Disziplinen". free-diving.de (in German). Retrieved 9 August 2020. ^ "Johanna Nordblad Swims 50m Under Ice For New Guinness World Record". www.deeperblue.com. Retrieved 13 August 2020. ^ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DpeM4FNXRsE ^ "Under Ice, 50M new world record". .freedive-earth.com. Retrieved 9 August 2020. ^ Wong, R. M. (1999). "Taravana revisited: Decompression illness after breath-hold diving". South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal. 29 (3). ISSN 0813-1988. OCLC 16986801. Archived from the original on 21 August 2009. Retrieved 8 April 2008. ^ Milton, Sarah (2004). "Go ahead, vent your spleen!". Journal of Experimental Biology. 207 (3): 390. doi:10.1242/jeb.00794. ^ Schagatay E (2009). "Predicting performance in competitive apnoea diving. Part I: static apnoea". Diving Hyperb Med. 39 (2): 88–99. PMID 22753202. Retrieved 6 October 2013. ^ Simpson, G.; Ferns, J.; Murat, S. (2003). "Pulmonary effects of 'lung packing' by buccal pumping in an elite breath-hold diver". Journal of the South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society. 33: 122–126. Retrieved 14 October 2016. ^ Nestor, James (26 May 2020). Breath: The New Science of a Lost Art. Penguin Publishing Company. ISBN 9780735213616. ^ Gross, Terri. "How The 'Lost Art' Of Breathing Can Impact Sleep And Resilience". npr.org. Retrieved 29 May 2020. ^ "RSMAS General (RSM) < University of Miami". bulletin.miami.edu. Retrieved 2021-10-16. ^ Tannen, Janette Neuwahl (October 23, 2020). "Oceanographer finds solace under the surface". news.miami.edu. Retrieved 2021-10-16. ^ Paris, Claire; Paris, Ricardo (August 1, 2020). "Freediving for Science". Divers Alert Network. Retrieved 2021-10-16. ^ Pollock, Neal W.; Vann, Richard D.; Thalmann, Edward D.; Lundgren, Claus E. G. (1997). Maney, Jr, E. J.; Ellis, Jr, C. H. (eds.). Oxygen-Enhanced Breath-hold Diving, Phase I: Hyperventilation and Carbon Dioxide Elimination. Diving for Science 1997. Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences (17th Annual Scientific Diving Symposium). Retrieved 16 April 2009. ^ Lindholm, P; Pollock, N. W.; Lundgren, C. E. (2006). Breath-hold diving. Proceedings of the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society/Divers Alert Network 2006 June 20–21 Workshop. Durham, NC: Divers Alert Network. ISBN 978-1-930536-36-4. Retrieved 30 April 2008. ^ Fitz-Clarke, J. R. (2006). "Adverse events in competitive breath-hold diving". Undersea Hyperb Med. 33 (1): 55–62. PMID 16602257. Retrieved 6 October 2013. ^ Skolnick, Adam (17 November 2013). "A Deep-Water Diver From Brooklyn Dies After Trying for a Record". The New York Times. Retrieved 30 November 2013. ^ "Ocean Men: Extreme Dive (2001)". IMDb. IMDb.com, Inc. 31 August 2001. Retrieved 15 June 2018. ^ My Pilot, Whale on YouTube Dolphin_Embassy, 24 July 2015 Further reading[edit] DeeperBlue.com (2016) The Beginners Guide to Freediving, published by DeeperBlue.com Callagy, Feargus (2012) A Beginners Guide to Freediving, e-book published by DeeperBlue.com Donald, Ian (2013) Underwater foraging – Freediving for food, Createspace publishing, USA. ISBN 978-1484904596 Farrell, Emma (2006) One Breath: A Reflection on Freediving, photographs by Frederic Buyle, Pynto Ltd., Hatherley, UK: ISBN 0-9542315-2-X Pelizzari, Umberto & Tovaglieri, Stefano (2001) Manual of Freediving: Underwater on a single breath, English translation 2004 by Idelson-Gnocchi Ltd., Reddick, FL: ISBN 1928649270 Severinsen, Stig A. (2010) Breathology: The Art of Conscious Breathing, Idelson-Gnocchi Ltd., Reddick, FL: ISBN 978-1928649342 James Nestor (2015) "Deep: Freediving, Renegade Science, and What the Ocean Tells Us About Ourselves", Eamon Dolan/Mariner Books New York, NY: ISBN 978-0544484078 External links[edit] Look up freediving in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Freediving. AIDA International Collaborative cartography of freediving spots/Cartographie collaborative des spots apnée (in French) DeeperBlue website The Beginners Guide to Freediving - published by DeeperBlue.com FreedivingCourses.com - a way to find Freediving instructors and dive centers around the world DiveWise.Org - non profit organization dedicated to freediving education and safety Explore Freediving - Freediving and Snorkeling events and instructor directory Freediving Spots Borgosub.fr French association to promote Wreck freediving Freitauchen-lernen.com - deutschsprachiger Freediving Blog www.apnoetauchen-lernen.de - German Center for education and development of freediving. v t e Underwater diving Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving shot Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Diver propulsion vehicle Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Wet Nellie Wet sub Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA CDLSE Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Viper Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Sea Trek Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Sub Sea Systems Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat Rubber Raiding Craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Jules' Undersea Lodge Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaik? ROV Ka?if ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone Seahorse ROUV SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater ice hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Peppo Biscarini Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran ?olak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalk?l?ç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard ?ahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Annelie Pompe Michal Risian Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Aharon Solomons Martin Št?pánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Media diving Nondestructive testing Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater construction Offshore construction Underwater demolition Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater videography Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) National Association for Cave Diving (NACD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in East Timor Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving on Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Lack of competence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diving hand signals Diving line signals Diver voice communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Solo diving Water safety Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Approaches to safety Job safety analysis Risk assessment Toolbox talk Housekeeping Association of Diving Contractors International Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency procedure Emergency response plan Evacuation plan Hazardous Materials Identification System Hierarchy of hazard controls Administrative controls Engineering controls Hazard elimination Hazard substitution Personal protective equipment International Marine Contractors Association Occupational hazard Biological hazard Chemical hazard Physical hazard Psychosocial hazard Occupational hygiene Exposure assessment Occupational exposure limit Workplace health surveillance Safety culture Code of practice Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Health and safety representative Operations manual Safety meeting Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana Dysbaric osteonecrosis High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr. Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen John Rawlins R.N. Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Southern African Underwater and Hyperbaric Medical Association (SAUHMA) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents UNESCO Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Timeline of diving technology Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors William Beebe Georges Beuchat John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Joseph-Martin Cabirol Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Jacques Triger Equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Vintage scuba Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Fire on MV Red Sea Aggressor Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr. Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Pier Skipness Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Koz?owski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Universal Referral Program World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Diving Educators Association (IDEA) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scottish Sub Aqua Club (ScotSAC) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualt? Sporlar? Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Association for Cave Diving (NACD) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Underwater ice hockey Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualt? Sporlar? Federasyonu Underwater Society of America) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide David Moore Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Dermot FitzGerald Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr. Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Gregory R. Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving Diving physics Breathing performance of regulators Buoyancy Archimedes' principle Neutral buoyancy Concentration Diffusion Molecular diffusion Force Oxygen fraction Permeation Psychrometric constant Solubility Henry's law Saturation Solution Supersaturation Surface tension Hydrophobe Surfactant Temperature Torricellian chamber Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Snell's law Underwater computer vision Weight Apparent weight Gas laws Amontons's law Boyle's law Charles's law Combined gas law Dalton's law Gay-Lussac's law Ideal gas law Pressure Absolute pressure Ambient pressure Atmospheric pressure Gauge pressure Hydrostatic pressure Metre sea water Partial pressure Diving physiology Artificial gills Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Lipid Maximum operating depth Metabolism Physiological response to water immersion Tissue Underwater vision Circulatory system Blood shift Patent foramen ovale Perfusion Pulmonary circulation Systemic circulation Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Equivalent narcotic depth Oxygen window in diving decompression Physiology of decompression Respiration Blood–air barrier Breathing CO? retention Dead space Gas exchange Hypocapnia Respiratory exchange ratio Respiratory quotient Respiratory system Work of breathing Diving environment Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Environmental factors Algal bloom Currents: Current Longshore drift Ocean current Rip current Tidal race Undertow Upwelling Ekman transport Halocline Reef Coral reef Stratification Thermocline Tides Turbidity Wind wave Breaking wave Surf Surge Swell Wave shoaling Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole-class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul-class submersible Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces-class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic-class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz-class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Diving Equipment and Marketing Association Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Historical Diving Society Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club Project AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Submarine escape and rescue Escape trunk International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Submarine rescue ship Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal v t e Extreme and adventure sports Boardsports Bellyboarding Bodyboarding Dirtsurfing Kite landboarding Kiteboarding Longboarding Mountainboarding Riverboarding Sandboarding Skateboarding Skimboarding Skysurfing Snowboarding Snowskating Street luging Surfing River surfing Wakeboarding Windsurfing Motorsports Drifting Motocross Freestyle Rallycross Rallying Snocross Supercross Water sports Coasteering Freediving High diving Jet Skiing Scuba diving Cave diving Technical diving Snorkeling Water skiing Whitewater canoeing Whitewater kayaking Whitewater rafting Climbing Bouldering Canyoning Crane climbing Free solo climbing Ice climbing Mountaineering Rock climbing Skyrunning Falling BASE jumping Ski-BASE jumping Bungee jumping Cliff-diving Cliff jumping Tombstoning Parachuting / skydiving Flying Air racing Gliding Hang gliding Paragliding Powered paragliding Parasailing Speed flying Wingsuit flying Cycling BMX BMX racing Freestyle BMX Mountain biking Downhill Rolling Freestyle scootering Inline skating Aggressive inline skating Vert skating Roller skating Skiing Extreme skiing Freeriding Freestyle skiing Speed skiing Sledding Bobsleigh Extreme sledding Luge Skeleton Food Cheese rolling Nettle eating Others Adventure racing Caving Extreme ironing Extreme Pogo Fell running Obstacle racing Orienteering Powerbocking Slacklining Ultramarathon Zip-lining Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) National libraries United States Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Freediving&oldid=1054678300" Categories: Freediving Individual sports Underwater sports Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1: long volume value Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with Ancient Greek-language sources (grc) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2020 CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Articles containing potentially dated statements from September 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from February 2018 Articles to be expanded from July 2017 All articles to be expanded Articles using small message boxes Articles with unsourced statements from September 2014 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2017 Articles to be expanded from October 2019 Articles with empty sections from October 2019 All articles with empty sections Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 Articles to be expanded from October 2018 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with GND identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans ??????? Bân-lâm-gú ?????????? Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara ????? Français Gaeilge ??? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Lietuvi? Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Polski Português Român? ??????? Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe ?????????? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 11 November 2021, at 13:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement