https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C4%85sawa_massacre G?sawa massacre - Wikipedia G?sawa massacre From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search 13th-century massacre in Poland The G?sawa Congress, by Matejko. Participants in discussion, before the massacre. Death of Leszek the White, by Matejko. Leszek, High Duke of Poland, was caught in his bath but fled on horseback. The attackers caught up with him a few kilometers out of G?sawa. Monument at site of Leszek's death The G?sawa massacre (Polish: Zbrodnia g?sawska, literally "the G?sawa crime") was an attack on the night of 23 / 24 November 1227 during a council of Polish Piast dukes which was being held near the village of G?sawa in Kujawy, Poland. The High Duke of Poland, Leszek the White, was assassinated, and Duke Henry the Bearded of Silesia was gravely wounded.[1][2] At the time of the attack some of the victims were bathing in preparation for retiring for the night, and so the event is also known in Polish historiography as the G?sawa bloodbath (krwawa ?a?nia w G?sawie).[3] Motive[edit] Responsibility for the attack is generally ascribed by historians to ?wi?tope?k of Pomerania.[4] ?wi?tope?k's aim was to make the Duchy of Gda?sk Pomerania, which his House of Sobies?aw held as regents of the Polish rulers, independent of Piast overlordship. The murder of Leszek the White, ?wi?tope?k's suzerain, thus served his interests. However, several historians have pointed to Duke W?adys?aw Odonic,[1] who had forged an alliance with ?wi?tope?k shortly before the attack, as the main instigator.[5] Odonic's actual target would have been his uncle, Duke W?adys?aw Spindleshanks, with whom Odonic had been involved in a long-running conflict over control of Greater Poland (Wielkopolska). Under this hypothesis, Odonic provided information necessary for a successful attack to ?wi?tope?k's men, who actually did the deed.[citation needed] Other historians have disputed this thesis, pointing out that Spindleshanks was not harmed in the attack, that Odonic did not profit from the death of Leszek (with whom he had had generally amicable relations), and that there is no record that contemporaries or the families of the slain held Odonic responsible. Rather, in this view, the blame was ascribed retroactively to Odonic several decades later, during fighting between Dukes of Silesia who were descendants of Henry, and those of Greater Poland, who were related to Odonic. A particularly puzzling fact is the absence of condemnation by ecclesiastical authorities (some of whom were present at the meeting), who at that time took an active role in Polish political affairs and tended to react strongly to regicides.[6] Outcomes[edit] Whatever the exact circumstances of, or the responsibility for, the event, it is generally accepted that the crime contributed to the deepening of the feudal fragmentation of Poland. ?wi?tope?k successfully cast off the control of the Piast dukes over Gda?sk Pomerania and began using the title dux (rather than "regent").[5] Piast control over the area was not re-established until the Treaty of K?pno (1282) between M?ciwój II of Pomerania and Przemys? II (perhaps ironically, a grandson of Odonic).[1] The death of Leszek the White undermined the authority and status of the "High Duke of Poland" (principat), who technically ruled over all the other regional Polish dukes; and the "seniorate" province of Kraków/Ma?opolska essentially became just another feudal area to be fought over. Poland, as a unified political entity, would not be re-established until the reign of Wenceslaus III or W?adys?aw the Elbow-high at the turn of the 13th and 14th centuries.[1][3] Notes[edit] ^ a b c d Jasienica Pawel (2007). Polska Piastow. Proszynski. pp. 174, 236. ISBN 9788374694797. ^ Biskup, Marian (2005). The History of Polish Diplomacy: X – XX C. Sejm Publishing Office. p. 44. ISBN 978-83-7059-708-5. ^ a b Sa?a?ski, Marcin (Nov 2012, 24). "Zjazd w G?sawie czyli rozpad piastowskiej jedno?ci?". HistMag.org. Retrieved March 11, 2013. Check date values in: |date= (help) ^ Bartos, Sebastian (2008). Negotiations of Power in a Medieval Society: Ecclesiastical Authority and Secular Rulership in Little Poland, 1177—1320. ProQuest. p. 66. ^ a b Gladysz, Mikolaj (2012). The Forgotten Crusaders: Poland and the Crusader Movement in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. Brill. p. 209. ISBN 9789004185517. ^ Labuda, Gerard (1995). "?mier? Leszka Bia?ego (1227)". Roczniki Historyczne. 61: 7–33. Gerard Labuda describing the views of Józef Uminski. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=G?sawa_massacre&oldid=1056961959" Categories: 13th century in Poland ?nin County Conflicts in 1227 1227 in Europe 13th-century massacres Massacres in Poland Hidden categories: CS1 errors: dates Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Polish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Polski Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 15:56 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C4%85sawa_massacre G?sawa massacre - Wikipedia G?sawa massacre From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search 13th-century massacre in Poland The G?sawa Congress, by Matejko. Participants in discussion, before the massacre. Death of Leszek the White, by Matejko. Leszek, High Duke of Poland, was caught in his bath but fled on horseback. The attackers caught up with him a few kilometers out of G?sawa. Monument at site of Leszek's death The G?sawa massacre (Polish: Zbrodnia g?sawska, literally "the G?sawa crime") was an attack on the night of 23 / 24 November 1227 during a council of Polish Piast dukes which was being held near the village of G?sawa in Kujawy, Poland. The High Duke of Poland, Leszek the White, was assassinated, and Duke Henry the Bearded of Silesia was gravely wounded.[1][2] At the time of the attack some of the victims were bathing in preparation for retiring for the night, and so the event is also known in Polish historiography as the G?sawa bloodbath (krwawa ?a?nia w G?sawie).[3] Motive[edit] Responsibility for the attack is generally ascribed by historians to ?wi?tope?k of Pomerania.[4] ?wi?tope?k's aim was to make the Duchy of Gda?sk Pomerania, which his House of Sobies?aw held as regents of the Polish rulers, independent of Piast overlordship. The murder of Leszek the White, ?wi?tope?k's suzerain, thus served his interests. However, several historians have pointed to Duke W?adys?aw Odonic,[1] who had forged an alliance with ?wi?tope?k shortly before the attack, as the main instigator.[5] Odonic's actual target would have been his uncle, Duke W?adys?aw Spindleshanks, with whom Odonic had been involved in a long-running conflict over control of Greater Poland (Wielkopolska). Under this hypothesis, Odonic provided information necessary for a successful attack to ?wi?tope?k's men, who actually did the deed.[citation needed] Other historians have disputed this thesis, pointing out that Spindleshanks was not harmed in the attack, that Odonic did not profit from the death of Leszek (with whom he had had generally amicable relations), and that there is no record that contemporaries or the families of the slain held Odonic responsible. Rather, in this view, the blame was ascribed retroactively to Odonic several decades later, during fighting between Dukes of Silesia who were descendants of Henry, and those of Greater Poland, who were related to Odonic. A particularly puzzling fact is the absence of condemnation by ecclesiastical authorities (some of whom were present at the meeting), who at that time took an active role in Polish political affairs and tended to react strongly to regicides.[6] Outcomes[edit] Whatever the exact circumstances of, or the responsibility for, the event, it is generally accepted that the crime contributed to the deepening of the feudal fragmentation of Poland. ?wi?tope?k successfully cast off the control of the Piast dukes over Gda?sk Pomerania and began using the title dux (rather than "regent").[5] Piast control over the area was not re-established until the Treaty of K?pno (1282) between M?ciwój II of Pomerania and Przemys? II (perhaps ironically, a grandson of Odonic).[1] The death of Leszek the White undermined the authority and status of the "High Duke of Poland" (principat), who technically ruled over all the other regional Polish dukes; and the "seniorate" province of Kraków/Ma?opolska essentially became just another feudal area to be fought over. Poland, as a unified political entity, would not be re-established until the reign of Wenceslaus III or W?adys?aw the Elbow-high at the turn of the 13th and 14th centuries.[1][3] Notes[edit] ^ a b c d Jasienica Pawel (2007). Polska Piastow. Proszynski. pp. 174, 236. ISBN 9788374694797. ^ Biskup, Marian (2005). The History of Polish Diplomacy: X – XX C. Sejm Publishing Office. p. 44. ISBN 978-83-7059-708-5. ^ a b Sa?a?ski, Marcin (Nov 2012, 24). "Zjazd w G?sawie czyli rozpad piastowskiej jedno?ci?". HistMag.org. Retrieved March 11, 2013. Check date values in: |date= (help) ^ Bartos, Sebastian (2008). Negotiations of Power in a Medieval Society: Ecclesiastical Authority and Secular Rulership in Little Poland, 1177—1320. ProQuest. p. 66. ^ a b Gladysz, Mikolaj (2012). The Forgotten Crusaders: Poland and the Crusader Movement in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. Brill. p. 209. ISBN 9789004185517. ^ Labuda, Gerard (1995). "?mier? Leszka Bia?ego (1227)". Roczniki Historyczne. 61: 7–33. Gerard Labuda describing the views of Józef Uminski. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=G?sawa_massacre&oldid=1056961959" Categories: 13th century in Poland ?nin County Conflicts in 1227 1227 in Europe 13th-century massacres Massacres in Poland Hidden categories: CS1 errors: dates Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Polish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Polski Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 15:56 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C4%85sawa_massacre G?sawa massacre - Wikipedia G?sawa massacre From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search 13th-century massacre in Poland The G?sawa Congress, by Matejko. Participants in discussion, before the massacre. Death of Leszek the White, by Matejko. Leszek, High Duke of Poland, was caught in his bath but fled on horseback. The attackers caught up with him a few kilometers out of G?sawa. Monument at site of Leszek's death The G?sawa massacre (Polish: Zbrodnia g?sawska, literally "the G?sawa crime") was an attack on the night of 23 / 24 November 1227 during a council of Polish Piast dukes which was being held near the village of G?sawa in Kujawy, Poland. The High Duke of Poland, Leszek the White, was assassinated, and Duke Henry the Bearded of Silesia was gravely wounded.[1][2] At the time of the attack some of the victims were bathing in preparation for retiring for the night, and so the event is also known in Polish historiography as the G?sawa bloodbath (krwawa ?a?nia w G?sawie).[3] Motive[edit] Responsibility for the attack is generally ascribed by historians to ?wi?tope?k of Pomerania.[4] ?wi?tope?k's aim was to make the Duchy of Gda?sk Pomerania, which his House of Sobies?aw held as regents of the Polish rulers, independent of Piast overlordship. The murder of Leszek the White, ?wi?tope?k's suzerain, thus served his interests. However, several historians have pointed to Duke W?adys?aw Odonic,[1] who had forged an alliance with ?wi?tope?k shortly before the attack, as the main instigator.[5] Odonic's actual target would have been his uncle, Duke W?adys?aw Spindleshanks, with whom Odonic had been involved in a long-running conflict over control of Greater Poland (Wielkopolska). Under this hypothesis, Odonic provided information necessary for a successful attack to ?wi?tope?k's men, who actually did the deed.[citation needed] Other historians have disputed this thesis, pointing out that Spindleshanks was not harmed in the attack, that Odonic did not profit from the death of Leszek (with whom he had had generally amicable relations), and that there is no record that contemporaries or the families of the slain held Odonic responsible. Rather, in this view, the blame was ascribed retroactively to Odonic several decades later, during fighting between Dukes of Silesia who were descendants of Henry, and those of Greater Poland, who were related to Odonic. A particularly puzzling fact is the absence of condemnation by ecclesiastical authorities (some of whom were present at the meeting), who at that time took an active role in Polish political affairs and tended to react strongly to regicides.[6] Outcomes[edit] Whatever the exact circumstances of, or the responsibility for, the event, it is generally accepted that the crime contributed to the deepening of the feudal fragmentation of Poland. ?wi?tope?k successfully cast off the control of the Piast dukes over Gda?sk Pomerania and began using the title dux (rather than "regent").[5] Piast control over the area was not re-established until the Treaty of K?pno (1282) between M?ciwój II of Pomerania and Przemys? II (perhaps ironically, a grandson of Odonic).[1] The death of Leszek the White undermined the authority and status of the "High Duke of Poland" (principat), who technically ruled over all the other regional Polish dukes; and the "seniorate" province of Kraków/Ma?opolska essentially became just another feudal area to be fought over. Poland, as a unified political entity, would not be re-established until the reign of Wenceslaus III or W?adys?aw the Elbow-high at the turn of the 13th and 14th centuries.[1][3] Notes[edit] ^ a b c d Jasienica Pawel (2007). Polska Piastow. Proszynski. pp. 174, 236. ISBN 9788374694797. ^ Biskup, Marian (2005). The History of Polish Diplomacy: X – XX C. Sejm Publishing Office. p. 44. ISBN 978-83-7059-708-5. ^ a b Sa?a?ski, Marcin (Nov 2012, 24). "Zjazd w G?sawie czyli rozpad piastowskiej jedno?ci?". HistMag.org. Retrieved March 11, 2013. Check date values in: |date= (help) ^ Bartos, Sebastian (2008). Negotiations of Power in a Medieval Society: Ecclesiastical Authority and Secular Rulership in Little Poland, 1177—1320. ProQuest. p. 66. ^ a b Gladysz, Mikolaj (2012). The Forgotten Crusaders: Poland and the Crusader Movement in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. Brill. p. 209. ISBN 9789004185517. ^ Labuda, Gerard (1995). "?mier? Leszka Bia?ego (1227)". Roczniki Historyczne. 61: 7–33. Gerard Labuda describing the views of Józef Uminski. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=G?sawa_massacre&oldid=1056961959" Categories: 13th century in Poland ?nin County Conflicts in 1227 1227 in Europe 13th-century massacres Massacres in Poland Hidden categories: CS1 errors: dates Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Polish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Polski Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 15:56 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C4%85sawa_massacre G?sawa massacre - Wikipedia G?sawa massacre From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search 13th-century massacre in Poland The G?sawa Congress, by Matejko. Participants in discussion, before the massacre. Death of Leszek the White, by Matejko. Leszek, High Duke of Poland, was caught in his bath but fled on horseback. The attackers caught up with him a few kilometers out of G?sawa. Monument at site of Leszek's death The G?sawa massacre (Polish: Zbrodnia g?sawska, literally "the G?sawa crime") was an attack on the night of 23 / 24 November 1227 during a council of Polish Piast dukes which was being held near the village of G?sawa in Kujawy, Poland. The High Duke of Poland, Leszek the White, was assassinated, and Duke Henry the Bearded of Silesia was gravely wounded.[1][2] At the time of the attack some of the victims were bathing in preparation for retiring for the night, and so the event is also known in Polish historiography as the G?sawa bloodbath (krwawa ?a?nia w G?sawie).[3] Motive[edit] Responsibility for the attack is generally ascribed by historians to ?wi?tope?k of Pomerania.[4] ?wi?tope?k's aim was to make the Duchy of Gda?sk Pomerania, which his House of Sobies?aw held as regents of the Polish rulers, independent of Piast overlordship. The murder of Leszek the White, ?wi?tope?k's suzerain, thus served his interests. However, several historians have pointed to Duke W?adys?aw Odonic,[1] who had forged an alliance with ?wi?tope?k shortly before the attack, as the main instigator.[5] Odonic's actual target would have been his uncle, Duke W?adys?aw Spindleshanks, with whom Odonic had been involved in a long-running conflict over control of Greater Poland (Wielkopolska). Under this hypothesis, Odonic provided information necessary for a successful attack to ?wi?tope?k's men, who actually did the deed.[citation needed] Other historians have disputed this thesis, pointing out that Spindleshanks was not harmed in the attack, that Odonic did not profit from the death of Leszek (with whom he had had generally amicable relations), and that there is no record that contemporaries or the families of the slain held Odonic responsible. Rather, in this view, the blame was ascribed retroactively to Odonic several decades later, during fighting between Dukes of Silesia who were descendants of Henry, and those of Greater Poland, who were related to Odonic. A particularly puzzling fact is the absence of condemnation by ecclesiastical authorities (some of whom were present at the meeting), who at that time took an active role in Polish political affairs and tended to react strongly to regicides.[6] Outcomes[edit] Whatever the exact circumstances of, or the responsibility for, the event, it is generally accepted that the crime contributed to the deepening of the feudal fragmentation of Poland. ?wi?tope?k successfully cast off the control of the Piast dukes over Gda?sk Pomerania and began using the title dux (rather than "regent").[5] Piast control over the area was not re-established until the Treaty of K?pno (1282) between M?ciwój II of Pomerania and Przemys? II (perhaps ironically, a grandson of Odonic).[1] The death of Leszek the White undermined the authority and status of the "High Duke of Poland" (principat), who technically ruled over all the other regional Polish dukes; and the "seniorate" province of Kraków/Ma?opolska essentially became just another feudal area to be fought over. Poland, as a unified political entity, would not be re-established until the reign of Wenceslaus III or W?adys?aw the Elbow-high at the turn of the 13th and 14th centuries.[1][3] Notes[edit] ^ a b c d Jasienica Pawel (2007). Polska Piastow. Proszynski. pp. 174, 236. ISBN 9788374694797. ^ Biskup, Marian (2005). The History of Polish Diplomacy: X – XX C. Sejm Publishing Office. p. 44. ISBN 978-83-7059-708-5. ^ a b Sa?a?ski, Marcin (Nov 2012, 24). "Zjazd w G?sawie czyli rozpad piastowskiej jedno?ci?". HistMag.org. Retrieved March 11, 2013. Check date values in: |date= (help) ^ Bartos, Sebastian (2008). Negotiations of Power in a Medieval Society: Ecclesiastical Authority and Secular Rulership in Little Poland, 1177—1320. ProQuest. p. 66. ^ a b Gladysz, Mikolaj (2012). The Forgotten Crusaders: Poland and the Crusader Movement in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. Brill. p. 209. ISBN 9789004185517. ^ Labuda, Gerard (1995). "?mier? Leszka Bia?ego (1227)". Roczniki Historyczne. 61: 7–33. Gerard Labuda describing the views of Józef Uminski. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=G?sawa_massacre&oldid=1056961959" Categories: 13th century in Poland ?nin County Conflicts in 1227 1227 in Europe 13th-century massacres Massacres in Poland Hidden categories: CS1 errors: dates Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Polish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Polski Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 15:56 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C4%85sawa_massacre G?sawa massacre - Wikipedia G?sawa massacre From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search 13th-century massacre in Poland The G?sawa Congress, by Matejko. Participants in discussion, before the massacre. Death of Leszek the White, by Matejko. Leszek, High Duke of Poland, was caught in his bath but fled on horseback. The attackers caught up with him a few kilometers out of G?sawa. Monument at site of Leszek's death The G?sawa massacre (Polish: Zbrodnia g?sawska, literally "the G?sawa crime") was an attack on the night of 23 / 24 November 1227 during a council of Polish Piast dukes which was being held near the village of G?sawa in Kujawy, Poland. The High Duke of Poland, Leszek the White, was assassinated, and Duke Henry the Bearded of Silesia was gravely wounded.[1][2] At the time of the attack some of the victims were bathing in preparation for retiring for the night, and so the event is also known in Polish historiography as the G?sawa bloodbath (krwawa ?a?nia w G?sawie).[3] Motive[edit] Responsibility for the attack is generally ascribed by historians to ?wi?tope?k of Pomerania.[4] ?wi?tope?k's aim was to make the Duchy of Gda?sk Pomerania, which his House of Sobies?aw held as regents of the Polish rulers, independent of Piast overlordship. The murder of Leszek the White, ?wi?tope?k's suzerain, thus served his interests. However, several historians have pointed to Duke W?adys?aw Odonic,[1] who had forged an alliance with ?wi?tope?k shortly before the attack, as the main instigator.[5] Odonic's actual target would have been his uncle, Duke W?adys?aw Spindleshanks, with whom Odonic had been involved in a long-running conflict over control of Greater Poland (Wielkopolska). Under this hypothesis, Odonic provided information necessary for a successful attack to ?wi?tope?k's men, who actually did the deed.[citation needed] Other historians have disputed this thesis, pointing out that Spindleshanks was not harmed in the attack, that Odonic did not profit from the death of Leszek (with whom he had had generally amicable relations), and that there is no record that contemporaries or the families of the slain held Odonic responsible. Rather, in this view, the blame was ascribed retroactively to Odonic several decades later, during fighting between Dukes of Silesia who were descendants of Henry, and those of Greater Poland, who were related to Odonic. A particularly puzzling fact is the absence of condemnation by ecclesiastical authorities (some of whom were present at the meeting), who at that time took an active role in Polish political affairs and tended to react strongly to regicides.[6] Outcomes[edit] Whatever the exact circumstances of, or the responsibility for, the event, it is generally accepted that the crime contributed to the deepening of the feudal fragmentation of Poland. ?wi?tope?k successfully cast off the control of the Piast dukes over Gda?sk Pomerania and began using the title dux (rather than "regent").[5] Piast control over the area was not re-established until the Treaty of K?pno (1282) between M?ciwój II of Pomerania and Przemys? II (perhaps ironically, a grandson of Odonic).[1] The death of Leszek the White undermined the authority and status of the "High Duke of Poland" (principat), who technically ruled over all the other regional Polish dukes; and the "seniorate" province of Kraków/Ma?opolska essentially became just another feudal area to be fought over. Poland, as a unified political entity, would not be re-established until the reign of Wenceslaus III or W?adys?aw the Elbow-high at the turn of the 13th and 14th centuries.[1][3] Notes[edit] ^ a b c d Jasienica Pawel (2007). Polska Piastow. Proszynski. pp. 174, 236. ISBN 9788374694797. ^ Biskup, Marian (2005). The History of Polish Diplomacy: X – XX C. Sejm Publishing Office. p. 44. ISBN 978-83-7059-708-5. ^ a b Sa?a?ski, Marcin (Nov 2012, 24). "Zjazd w G?sawie czyli rozpad piastowskiej jedno?ci?". HistMag.org. Retrieved March 11, 2013. Check date values in: |date= (help) ^ Bartos, Sebastian (2008). Negotiations of Power in a Medieval Society: Ecclesiastical Authority and Secular Rulership in Little Poland, 1177—1320. ProQuest. p. 66. ^ a b Gladysz, Mikolaj (2012). The Forgotten Crusaders: Poland and the Crusader Movement in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. Brill. p. 209. ISBN 9789004185517. ^ Labuda, Gerard (1995). "?mier? Leszka Bia?ego (1227)". Roczniki Historyczne. 61: 7–33. Gerard Labuda describing the views of Józef Uminski. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=G?sawa_massacre&oldid=1056961959" Categories: 13th century in Poland ?nin County Conflicts in 1227 1227 in Europe 13th-century massacres Massacres in Poland Hidden categories: CS1 errors: dates Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Polish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Polski Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 15:56 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement