https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,285 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,409,273 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,285 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,409,273 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Your_first_article Help:Your first article - Wikipedia Help:Your first article From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Overview of the guidelines, requirements, suggestions for the newbie editor "WP:1ST" and "WP:FIRST" redirect here. For other uses, see Wikipedia:1st (disambiguation). Writing an article Learn how you can create an article. This page in a nutshell: Wikipedia articles follow certain guidelines: the topic should be notable and be covered in detail in good references from independent sources. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia – it is not a personal home page or a business list. Do not copy content from other websites even if you, your school, or your boss owns them. If you choose to create the article with only a limited knowledge of the standards here, you should be aware that other editors may delete it if it's not considered appropriate. Shortcuts WP:YFA WP:FIRST H:YFA H:FIRST WP:1ST New here? Creating an article is one of the more difficult tasks on Wikipedia, and you'll have a higher chance of success if you help us out with other tasks first to learn more about how Wikipedia works. You can always come back to create an article later; there is no deadline! Wikipedia:Processes Article creation Introductory Getting started with Wikipedia Article wizard Your first article Suggested articles Most-wanted articles Requested articles Images needing articles Concepts and guidelines Standard layout Lead section Sections Stub articles Categorization Development processes Article development Moving a page Merging articles Featured article criteria The perfect article Meta tools and groups WikiProject: Articles for creation Special:NewPages New pages patrol New articles by topic Recent additions (DYK) v t e Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor, you will become a Wikipedian. Before starting a new article, please review Wikipedia's notability requirements. In short, the topic of an article must have already been the subject of publication in reliable, secondary, entirely independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail, such as books, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals and websites that meet the same requirements as reputable print-based sources. Information on Wikipedia must be verifiable; if no reliable third-party sources can be found on a topic, then it should not have a separate article. Please search Wikipedia first to make sure that an article does not already exist on the subject. An Article Wizard is available to help you create an article through the Articles for Creation process, where it will be reviewed and considered for publication. Please note that the backlog is long (currently, there are 2,440 pending submissions; it often takes months). The ability to create articles directly in the mainspace is restricted to editors with some experience. For information on how to request a new article that can be created by someone else, see Requested articles. Please consider taking a look at our introductory tutorial or reviewing contributing to Wikipedia to learn the basics about editing. Working on existing articles is a good way to learn our protocols and style conventions; see the Task Center for a range of articles that need your assistance and tasks you can help out with. Contents 1 The basics 2 Search for an existing article 3 Gathering references 4 Things to avoid 5 And be careful about... 6 Are you closely connected to the article topic? 7 Create your draft 8 And then what? 8.1 Keep making improvements 8.2 Improve formatting 8.3 Avoid orphans 8.4 Add to a disambiguation page 9 Still need help? 9.1 Read a traditional encyclopedia The basics First, please be aware that Wikipedia is an encyclopedia written by volunteers. Our mission is to share reliable knowledge to benefit people who want to learn. We are not social media, a place to promote a company or product or person, to advocate for or against anyone or anything, nor a place to first announce to the world information on topics that have not already been the subject of reliable publication. Please keep this in mind, always. (This is described in "What Wikipedia is not".) We find "accepted knowledge" in high quality, published sources. By "high quality" we mean books by reputable publishers, respected newspapers, peer reviewed scientific and academic journals, literature reviews and other sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. This means generally not using random personal websites, blogs, forum posts, Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter content, self-published sources like open wikis (including other Wikipedia articles), etc. We summarize such high quality, published sources in Wikipedia articles. That is all we do! Please make sure that anything you write on Wikipedia is based on such sources – not on what is in your head. Here are some tips that can help you with your first article: Register an account. All you need is to choose a username and password. This will give you various powers. After a few days of editing articles, it will give you the power to create a new one. Practice first. Before starting, try editing existing articles to get a feel for writing and for using Wikipedia's mark-up language—we recommend that you first take a tour through the tutorial or review contributing to Wikipedia to learn editing basics. Biographies of living people are among the most difficult articles to get right. Consider starting with something easier. Search Wikipedia to see if an article already exists on the subject, perhaps under a different title. If an article already exists, feel free to make any constructive edits to improve it, while citing the sources that verify your changes. No article on the subject exists? OK, now you need to try to determine if the subject you want to write about is what we call "notable" on Wikipedia. The question we ask is: does this topic belong in an encyclopedia? More than 200 articles are typically deleted from the English Wikipedia every day, mostly because of lack of notability. Please make sure your topic is notable by our definition before you spend time and effort on it. An article on a non-notable subject will be rejected or deleted. No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. We generally judge this by asking if there are at least three high-quality sources that a) have substantial discussion of the subject (not just a mention) and b) are written and published independently of the subject (so, a company's website or press releases are not OK). Everything here is based on high-quality independent sources, and without them, we generally just cannot write an article. By far, the largest cause of frustration for a writer of a new article is caused by lack of notability. Anything else can be corrected by improving an article, but lack of notability means the article will not remain on Wikipedia, regardless of how well written it is. To avoid frustration, start by determining notability before you spend any effort on an article. If you are not sure if the subject you want to write about is "notable", you can ask questions at the Wikipedia Teahouse. If those sources exist, we also ask that you demonstrate that notability of the topic, by citing these reliable, secondary, independent sources that treat the topic in substantive detail. Doing so for all significant factual statements in an article is also necessary to meet another core content standard: verifiability of information. We cannot stress enough how important citing your sources is at Wikipedia – it is at the heart of all of our core inclusion policies and guidelines. In order to learn about how to do so, we suggest starting with Help:Referencing for beginners and Help:Introduction to referencing, and then seeing Wikipedia:Citing sources for a more involved treatment, noting that each contains see also sections linking to additional help pages, guides, and tutorials. There is also a visual guide and a screencast available to walk you through aspects of citing your sources, as well as a screencast demonstrating the referencing features of Wikipedia's editing toolbars. Please be mindful of conflict of interest editing. If you have one, you will probably have a hard time writing a good enough Wikipedia article (this is not about you, it is just human nature). However, if you insist on trying, you need to disclose your conflict of interest, and try very hard not to allow your "external interest" to drive you to abuse Wikipedia. Please try hard to hear the feedback from independent people who review any draft you create before it is published and made available in the main encyclopedia. Your conflict of interest might lead you to believe something is "notable" when it isn't, and to argue too hard for it to be published here. The Article Wizard will help you create your article in Draft space, and will put some useful templates into your draft, including the button to click when you are ready to submit the draft for review. Article Wizard An easy way to create articles. These points are explained in further detail below. If you are logged in, and your account is autoconfirmed, you can also use this box below to create an article, by entering the article name in the box below and then clicking "Create page". Search for an existing article The English Wikipedia already has 6,410,348 articles. Before creating an article, try to make sure there is not already an article on the same topic, perhaps under a slightly different name. Search for the article, and review Wikipedia's article titling policy before creating your first article. If an article on your topic already exists, but you think people might look for it under some different name or spelling, learn how to create redirects to alternative titles; adding needed redirects is a good way to help Wikipedia. If you're not already autoconfirmed, you can request a redirect to be created at Wikipedia:Articles for creation/Redirects and categories, where a volunteer will review the request, and if it seems like a plausible search term, accept the redirect request. Also, remember to check the article's deletion log in order to avoid creating an article that has already been deleted. (In some cases, the topic may be suitable even if deleted in the past; the past deletion may have been because it was a copyright violation, did not explain the importance of the topic, or on other grounds addressed to the writing rather than the topic's suitability.) If a search does not find the topic, consider broadening your search to find existing articles that might include the subject of your article. For example, if you want to write an article about a band member, you might search for the band and then add information about your subject as a section within that broader article. Is it new? Type, then click "Go (try title)"   Gathering references Notability Subject-specific guidelines Academics Astronomical objects Books Events Films Geographic features Music Numbers Organizations and companies People Sports and athletes Web content See also Wikipedia essays Guide to deletion Common deletion outcomes Why was my article deleted? v t e Gather sources for the information you will be writing about. You will use references to establish notability and to cite particular facts. References used to support notability must meet additional criteria beyond reliability. References used for specific facts need not meet these additional criteria. To be worthy of inclusion in an encyclopedia, a subject must be sufficiently notable, and that notability must be verifiable through citations to reliable sources. As noted, the sources you use must be reliable; that is, they must be sources that exercise some form of editorial control and have some reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. Print sources (and web-based versions of those sources) tend to be the most reliable, though some web-only sources may also be reliable. Examples might include (but are not limited to) books published by major publishing houses, newspapers, magazines, peer-reviewed scholarly journals, websites of any of the above, and other websites that meet the same requirements as a reputable print-based source. In general, sources with no editorial control are not reliable. These include (but are not limited to) books published by vanity presses, self-published 'zines', blogs, web forums, Usenet discussions, personal social media, fan sites, vanity websites that permit the creation of self-promotional articles, and other similar venues. If anyone at all can post information without anyone else checking that information, it is probably not reliable. If there are reliable sources (such as newspapers, journals, or books) with extensive information published over an extended period about a subject, then that subject is notable. You must cite such sources as part of the process of creating (or expanding) the Wikipedia article as evidence of notability for evaluation by other editors. If you cannot find such reliable sources that provide extensive and comprehensive information about your proposed subject, then the subject is not notable or verifiable and almost certainly will be deleted. So your first job is to go find references to cite. There are many places to find reliable sources, including your local library, but if internet-based sources are to be used, start with books and news archive searches rather than a web search. Once you have references for your article, you can learn to place the references into the article by reading Help:Referencing for beginners and Wikipedia:Citing sources. Do not worry too much about formatting citations properly. It would be great if you did that, but the main thing is to get references into the article, even if they are not perfectly formatted. Things to avoid Shortcut WP:AVOIDCREATE Main pages: Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Avoiding common mistakes Articles about yourself, your family or friends, your website, a band you're in, your teacher, a word you made up, or a story you wrote If you or someone or something you are personally involved with is worthy of inclusion in the encyclopedia, let someone else add that article. Putting your friends in an encyclopedia may seem like a nice surprise or an amusing joke, but those articles are likely to be removed. In this process, feelings may be hurt and you may be blocked from editing if you repeatedly make attempts to re-create the article. These things can be avoided by a little forethought on your part. The article may remain if you have enough humility to make it neutral and the subject really is notable, but even then it's best to submit a draft for approval and consensus of the community instead of just posting it, since unconscious biases may still exist that you are unaware of. Advertising Please do not try to promote your product or business. Please do not post external links to your commercial website. We do have articles about products such as Kleenex and Sharpies and about notable businesses such as McDonald's, but if you are writing about a product or business, be sure you write from a neutral point of view, that you have no conflict of interest, and that you are able to find references in reliable sources that are independent from the subject you are writing about. For a business or similar organization, make sure it meets the specific notability guidelines for businesses and read the FAQ for non-profits and for-profit businesses. Attacks on a person or organization Material that violates our biographies of living persons policy or is intended to threaten, defame, or harass its subject or another entity is not permitted. Unsourced negative information, especially in articles about living people, is quickly removed, and attack pages may be deleted immediately. Personal essays or original research Wikipedia surveys existing human knowledge; it is not a place to publish new work. Do not write articles that present your own original theories, opinions, or insights, even if you can support them by reference to accepted work. A common mistake is to present a novel synthesis of ideas in an article. Remember, just because both Fact A and Fact B are true does not mean that A caused B, or vice versa (fallacies or post hoc ergo propter hoc). If the synthesis or causation is true, locate and cite reliable sources that report the connection. Non-notable topics People frequently add pages to Wikipedia without considering whether the topic is really notable enough to go into an encyclopedia. Because Wikipedia does not have the space limitations of paper-based encyclopedias, our notability policies and guidelines allow a wide range of articles – however, they do not allow every topic to be included. A particularly common special case of this is pages about people, companies, or groups of people that do not substantiate the notability or importance of their subject with reliable sources, so we have decided that such pages may be speedily deleted under our speedy deletion policy. This can offend – so please consider whether your chosen topic is notable enough for Wikipedia, and then substantiate the notability or importance of your subject by citing those reliable sources in the process of creating your article. Wikipedia is not a directory of everything in existence. A single sentence or only a website link Articles need to have real content of their own. See also: List of bad article ideas And be careful about... Copyright As a general rule, do not copy-paste text from other websites. (There are a few limited exceptions, and a few words as part of a properly cited and clearly attributed quotation is OK.) – Wikipedia:Copy-paste Copying things. Do not violate copyrights! Never copy-paste text into a Wikipedia article unless it is a relatively short quotation, placed in quotation marks, and cited using an inline citation. Even material that you are sure is in the public domain must be attributed to the source, or the result, while not a copyright violation, is plagiarism. Also, note that most web pages are not in the public domain and that most song lyrics are not, either. In fact, most things published after 1926 and almost all works written since January 1, 1978, are automatically protected by copyright under the Copyright Act of 1976 even if they have no copyright notice or © symbol. If you think what you are contributing is in the public domain, say where you got it, either in the article or on the discussion page, and on the discussion page give the reason why you think it is in the public domain (e.g., "It was published in 1895..."). For more information, see Wikipedia:Copyrights (which includes instructions for verifying permission to copy previously published text) and our non-free content guidelines for text. Finally, please note that superficial modification of material, such as minor rewording, is insufficient to avoid plagiarism and copyright violations. See Wikipedia:Close paraphrasing. Good sources 1. have a reputation for reliability: they are reliable sources 2. are independent of the subject 3. are verifiable by other editors Good research and citing your sources Articles written out of thin air may be better than nothing, but they are hard to verify, which is an important part of building a trusted reference work. Please research with the best sources available and cite them properly. Doing this, along with not copying text, will help avoid any possibility of plagiarism. We welcome good short articles, called "stubs", that can serve as launching pads from which others can take off – stubs can be relatively short, a few sentences, but should provide some useful information. If you do not have enough material to write a good stub, you probably should not create an article. At the end of a stub, you should include a "stub template" like this: {{stub}}. (Other Wikipedians will appreciate it if you use a more specific stub template, like {{art-stub}}. See the list of stub types for a list of all specific stub templates.) Stubs help track articles that need expansion. Articles or statements about living persons As with all topics, articles written about living persons must be referenced so that they can be verified. This requirement is enforced far more rigorously for any statements about a living (or recently deceased) person, and reviewers are supposed to immediately remove any unreferenced material without discussion. It is good practice to add your references as you write the article to avoid this immediate removal. Advocacy and controversial material Please do not write articles that advocate one particular viewpoint on politics, religion, or anything else. Understand what we mean by a neutral point of view before tackling this sort of topic. Articles that contain different definitions of the topic Articles are primarily about what something is, not any term(s). If the article is just about a word or phrase and especially if there are very different ways that a term is used, it usually belongs in Wiktionary. Instead, try to write a good short first paragraph that defines one subject as well as some more material to go with it. Organization Make sure there are incoming links to the new article from other Wikipedia articles (click "What links here" in the toolbox) and that the new article is included in at least one appropriate category (see help:category). Otherwise, it will be difficult for readers to find the article. Local-interest articles These are articles about places such as schools or streets that are of interest to a relatively small number of people such as alumni or people who live nearby. There is no consensus about such articles, but some will challenge them if they include nothing that shows how the place is special and different from tens of thousands of similar places. Photographs add interest. Try to give local-interest articles local colour. Third-party sources are the only way to prove that the subject you are writing about is notable. Breaking news events While Wikipedia accepts articles about notable recent events, articles about breaking news events with no enduring notability are not appropriate for our project. Consider writing such articles on our sister project Wikinews. See Wikipedia:Notability (events) for further information. Editing on the wrong page If you're trying to create a new page, you'll start with a completely empty edit box. If you see text in the editing box that is filled with words you didn't write (for example, the contents of this page), you're accidentally editing a pre-existing page. Don't use "Publish changes" to make your editions. See Wikipedia:How to create a page, and start over. Are you closely connected to the article topic? Wikipedia is the encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but there are special guidelines for editors who are paid or sponsored. These guidelines are intended to prevent biased articles and maintain the public's trust that content in Wikipedia is impartial and has been added in good faith. (See Wikipedia's conflict of interest (COI) guideline.) The official guideline is that editors should be volunteers. That means Wikipedia discourages editing articles about individuals, companies, organizations, products/services, or political causes that pay you directly or indirectly. This includes in-house PR departments and marketing departments, other company employees, public relations firms and publicists, social-media consultants, and online reputation management consultants. However, Wikipedia recognizes the large volume of good-faith contributions by people who have some affiliation to the articles they work on. Here are some ground rules. Note that this is not necessarily a full list, so use common sense when applying these rules. If you break these rules or game the system, your edits are likely to be reverted, and the article(s) and your other edits may get extra scrutiny from other Wikipedia editors. Your account may also be blocked. Things to avoid Things to be careful about Great ways to contribute Don't add promotional language Don't remove negative or critical text from an article Don't make a "group" account for multiple people to share Don't neglect to disclose your affiliation on the article's talk page Maintain a neutral, objective tone in any content you add or edit Cite independent, reliable sources (e.g., a major media article) for any new statements you add – even if you are confident a statement is true (e.g., it is about your work); make a statement only if it has been already published in a reliable source. Make minor edits/corrections to articles (e.g., typos, fixing links, adding references to reliable sources) If you are biased, suggest new article text or edits on the article talk page (not on the main article page). Disclose your relationship to the client/topic. Edit using personal accounts. Recruit help: Seek out a sponsor (volunteer editor) who has worked on similar articles, or submit ideas for article topics via Requested articles. Note that this only covers conflicts of interest. Editors are encouraged to write on topics related to their expertise: e.g., a NASA engineer might write about Jupiter, or an English professor might write about Mark Twain. Also, Wikipedians-in-residence or other interns who are paid, hosted or otherwise sponsored by a scientific or cultural institution can upload content and write articles in partnership with curators, indirectly providing positive branding for their hosts. Create your draft For an alternative way of creating a new Wikipedia article, without creating a draft first, see Wikipedia:How to create a page. It's always a good idea to draft your article before adding it to the main article space, and it's required for very new contributors. The article wizard will guide you through the steps of creating a draft. Prior to drafting your article, it's a good idea look at several existing Wikipedia articles on subjects similar to yours to see how such articles are formatted. The quality of our existing articles varies, so try to pick good ones. Article wizard When you feel that the article is ready, you can submit it for review by an experienced editor. If there isn't already a "Submit for review" button on the draft, you can add {{subst:submit}} to the top of the draft to submit it. A reviewer will then look at your draft and move it to the main article space or give you feedback on how to improve it. You can always edit the page, even while waiting for a review. Autoconfirmed users can publish their drafts to mainspace as Wikipedia articles via a pagemove, as explained in Wikipedia:Drafts#Publishing a draft. And then what? "WP:AFTER1ST" and "WP:AFTERFIRST" redirect here. For second step for proposed deletion, see WP:SECOND. For policy about secondary source, see WP:2ND. Now that you have created the page, there are still several things you can do: Shortcuts WP:AFTER1ST WP:AFTERFIRST WP:AFTERCREATE Keep making improvements Wikipedia is not finished. Generally, an article is nowhere near being completed the moment it is created. There is a long way to go. In fact, it may take you several edits just to get it started. If you have so much interest in the article you just created, you may learn more about it in the future, and accordingly, have more to add. This may be later today, tomorrow, or several months from now. Any time – go ahead. Improve formatting To format your article correctly (and expand it, and possibly even make it featured!), see Wikipedia:Tutorial to learn how to format your article Wikipedia:Writing better articles Wikipedia:The perfect article Wikipedia:Lead section Others can freely contribute to the article when it has been saved. The creator does not have special rights to control the later content. See Wikipedia:Ownership of articles. Also, to avoid getting frustrated or offended about the way others modify or remove your contributions, see Wikipedia:Don't be ashamed. Avoid orphans An orphaned article is an article that has few or no other articles linking to it. The main problem with an orphan is that it'll be unknown to others, and it may get fewer readers if it is not de-orphaned. Most new articles are orphans from the moment they are created, but you can work to change that. This will involve editing one or more other articles. Try searching Wikipedia for other pages referring to the subject of your article, then turn those references into links by adding double brackets to either side: "[[" and "]]". If another article has a word or phrase that has the same meaning as your new article that is not expressed using the exact same words as the title, you can link that word or phrase as follows: "[[title of your new article|word or phrase found in other article]]." Or in certain cases, you could create that word or phrase as a redirect to your new article. One of the first things you want to do after creating a new article is to provide links to it so it will not be an orphan. You can do that right away, or, if you find that exhausting, you can wait a while, provided that you keep the task in mind. See Wikipedia:Drawing attention to new pages to learn how to get others to see your new articles. Add to a disambiguation page If the term is ambiguous (meaning there are multiple pages using that or a similar title), see if there is a disambiguation page for articles bearing that title. If so, add a link to your article to that page. Still need help? Help desk For a list of informative, instructional and supportive pages, see Help directory. The best places to ask for assistance are at the Teahouse and at the main Help desk. Click here to ask for help on your talk page. A volunteer will visit you there shortly! For a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia, see Request departments. Alternately you can ask a question through the Wikipedia #wikipedia-en-help connect on IRC chat. Wiki Education offers a library of trainings for novice Wikipedia editors and students. Read a traditional encyclopedia Try to read traditional paper encyclopedia articles (or good or featured articles on Wikipedia) to get the layout, style, tone, and other elements of encyclopedic content. It is suggested that if you plan to write articles for an encyclopedia, you have some background knowledge in formal writing as well as about the topic at hand. A composition class in your high school or college is recommended before you start writing encyclopedia articles. The World Book is a good place to start. The goal of Wikipedia is to create an up-to-the-moment encyclopedia on every notable subject imaginable. Picture your article being published in a paper encyclopedia. v t e  Basic information on Wikipedia Help directory menu Reference desk Help desk About Wikipedia Administration FAQs Purpose Who writes Wikipedia? Organization Censorship Why create an account? In brief General disclaimer What Wikipedia is not Readers' FAQ Parental advice Navigation Searching Viewing media Help Mobile access Other languages Researching with Wikipedia Citing Wikipedia Student help Readers' index Copyright Book creation Contributing to Wikipedia Main introduction List of tutorials and introductions The answer Dos and don'ts Learning the ropes Common mistakes Newcomer primer Simplified ruleset Your first article Wizard Young Wikipedians The Adventure Protocols and conventions Five pillars Simplified ruleset Simplified MoS Etiquette Expectations Oversight Principles Ignore all rules The rules are principles Core content policies Policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines Vandalism Appealing blocks Getting assistance Requests for help Disputes resolution requests IRC live chat Tutorial Village pump Contact us Wikipedia community Community portal Dashboard Noticeboards Departments Maintenance Task Center Essays Meetups WikiProjects Sourcing and referencing Finding sources Combining sources Referencing Citations Citation Style 1 Citation templates Footnotes Page numbers Cite errors Information Editing Toolbar Conflict VisualEditor User guide Category Diffs Email confirmation Infoboxes Linking Link color Manual of Style Simplified Namespaces Page name URLs User contribution pages Using talk pages Archiving Image and media files Images Media files How-to Guide to page deletion Image deletion Logging in Merging pages Page renaming Requests Redirecting Reset passwords Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Uploading images Wiki markup Wiki markup Cheatsheet Barcharts Calculations Columns HTML Lists Magic words For beginners Music symbols Sections Sounds Special Characters Tables Templates Documentation Index Tools Transclusion Visual file markup Tutorial Directories Abbreviations Contents Edit summaries Essays Glossary Index The Missing Manual Shortcuts Tips Tip of the day Wikis Teahouse (interactive help for new editors) Ask for help on your talk page (a volunteer will visit you there) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Your_first_article&oldid=1053115564" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia how-to Wikipedia page help Wikipedia tips Wikipedia new articles Wikipedia newcomers Hidden categories: Help pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Help page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Afrikaans ?????? ??????? ???? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ??????? ????????? Bosanski Català ??????? ?eština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk ???????? Español Esperanto ????? ???????? ?????? Hausa ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ????? Jawa ????? ????????-??????? ??????? ??????? Ladino Magyar ?????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål ????? ?????? ???? Ripoarisch Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ????? ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?????????? (???????????) Edit links This page was last edited on 2 November 2021, at 00:39 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement