https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labor_Thanksgiving_Day Labor Thanksgiving Day - Wikipedia Labor Thanksgiving Day From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search National holiday in Japan This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Japanese. (October 2012) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Japanese article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 2,664 articles in the main category, and specifying|topic= will aid in categorization. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Japanese Wikipedia article at [[:ja:??????]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|ja|??????}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Labor Thanksgiving Day Official name ?????? (Kinr? Kansha no Hi) Observed by  Japan Type National holiday, public Significance Commemorates labor and production and giving one another thanks; formerly a harvest festival Celebrations School children prepare cards or gifts for people in the labor sector to show appreciation. Companies review their accomplishments and congratulate their workers for their dedication. Date November 23 Next time 23 November 2022 (2022-11) Frequency Annual Related to Niiname-no-Matsuri Labor Thanksgiving Day (??????, Kinr? Kansha no Hi) is an annual national holiday in Japan celebrated on November 23 of each year,[1] unless that day falls on a Sunday, in which case the holiday is moved to Monday.[2] The law establishing the holiday cites it as an occasion to respect labor, to celebrate production, and citizens give each other thanks.[3] Events are held throughout Japan, one such being the Nagano Ebisuko Fireworks Festival [ja], which had 400,000 attendees in 2017.[4] Contents 1 History 2 Celebration 3 See also 4 References 5 External links History[edit] Labor Thanksgiving Day is the modern name for an ancient harvest festival known as Niiname-sai (???, also read as Shinj?-sai), celebrating the harvest of the Five Cereals. The classical chronicle the Nihon Shoki mentions a harvest ritual having taken place during the reign of the legendary Emperor Jimmu (660–585 BC), as well as more formalized harvest celebrations during the reign of Emperor Seinei (480–484 AD). Modern scholars can date the basic forms of niiname-sai to the time of Emperor Tenmu (667–686 AD).[5] Traditionally, it celebrated the year's hard work; during the Niiname-sai ceremony, the Emperor would dedicate the year's harvest to kami (spirits), and taste the rice for the first time.[6] The modern holiday was established after World War II in 1948 as a day to mark some of the changes of the postwar Constitution of Japan, including fundamental human rights and the expansion of worker's rights.[7] Currently, Niiname-sai is still held privately by the Imperial House of Japan on the same day as Labor Thanksgiving Day, which has become a public national holiday.[6] May 1 is also celebrated as Labor Day by many trade unions in Japan,[8] which hold large rallies and marches in Tokyo, Osaka and Nagoya.[citation needed] Celebration[edit] On this day, school children prepare cards or gifts to distribute to police officers, firefighters, hospital staffs, personnel of the Japan Self-Defense Force and the Japan Coast Guard and other people in the labor sector to show appreciation for their contributions to the country.[7] Companies review their accomplishments and congratulate their workers for their dedication.[citation needed] Families get together and have dinner at home on this holiday. In addition, individuals themselves are encouraged to relax and take care of themselves.[9] See also[edit] Japanese calendar References[edit] ^ Stuart D. B. Picken (2010). Historical Dictionary of Shinto. Scarecrow Press. p. 217. ISBN 978-0-810-87372-8. ^ "Thanksgiving in Japan: Labour Thanksgiving Day". Japan Rail Pass Travel Blog. October 30, 2020. Retrieved November 21, 2020. ^ "???????????" [About "national holiday"]. Cabinet Office (Japan). Retrieved February 28, 2021. ^ "???? ???? ?????????". Shinano Daily News (in Japanese). November 24, 2017. Retrieved November 24, 2017.[permanent dead link] ^ Ohnuki-Tierney, Emiko (November 14, 1994). Rice as self: Japanese identities through time. Princeton University Press. pp. 46–7. ISBN 978-0-691-02110-2. Retrieved November 22, 2011. ^ a b Morrill, Ann (August 2009). Thanksgiving and Other Harvest Festivals. Infobase Publishing. p. 51. ISBN 978-1-60413-096-6. Retrieved November 22, 2011. ^ a b Miller, Adam (November 22, 2011). "Labor Thanksgiving Day – ??????". Axiom Magazine. Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2011. ^ Hijirida, Kyoko; Yoshikawa, Muneo (1987). Japanese language and culture for business and travel. University of Hawaii Press. p. 253. ISBN 978-0-8248-1017-7. Retrieved November 22, 2011. ^ "2020?????? ????????????????". SKYWARD+ (in Japanese). Japan Airlines. August 1, 2020. Retrieved November 21, 2020. External links[edit] Kids Web Japan Labor Thanksgiving Day Celebration v t e Public holidays in Japan New Year's Day (Japanese New Year) Coming of Age Day National Foundation Day The Emperor's Birthday Vernal Equinox Day Sh?wa Day Constitution Memorial Day Greenery Day Children's Day (Tango no sekku) (Okinawa Memorial Day) Marine Day Mountain Day Respect for the Aged Day Autumnal Equinox Day Sports Day Culture Day Labor Thanksgiving Day Golden Week (Japan) Silver Week Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Labor_Thanksgiving_Day&oldid=1056785344" Categories: Public holidays in Japan National holidays November observances Christmas-linked holidays Labour festivals Labour days Hidden categories: CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2018 Articles to be expanded from October 2012 All articles to be expanded Articles needing translation from Japanese Wikipedia Articles containing Japanese-language text Infobox holiday fixed day All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Deutsch Español ????? Français ??? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu ??? ??????? ??? ?????????? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 14:50 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labor_Thanksgiving_Day Labor Thanksgiving Day - Wikipedia Labor Thanksgiving Day From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search National holiday in Japan This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Japanese. (October 2012) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Japanese article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 2,664 articles in the main category, and specifying|topic= will aid in categorization. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Japanese Wikipedia article at [[:ja:??????]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|ja|??????}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Labor Thanksgiving Day Official name ?????? (Kinr? Kansha no Hi) Observed by  Japan Type National holiday, public Significance Commemorates labor and production and giving one another thanks; formerly a harvest festival Celebrations School children prepare cards or gifts for people in the labor sector to show appreciation. Companies review their accomplishments and congratulate their workers for their dedication. Date November 23 Next time 23 November 2022 (2022-11) Frequency Annual Related to Niiname-no-Matsuri Labor Thanksgiving Day (??????, Kinr? Kansha no Hi) is an annual national holiday in Japan celebrated on November 23 of each year,[1] unless that day falls on a Sunday, in which case the holiday is moved to Monday.[2] The law establishing the holiday cites it as an occasion to respect labor, to celebrate production, and citizens give each other thanks.[3] Events are held throughout Japan, one such being the Nagano Ebisuko Fireworks Festival [ja], which had 400,000 attendees in 2017.[4] Contents 1 History 2 Celebration 3 See also 4 References 5 External links History[edit] Labor Thanksgiving Day is the modern name for an ancient harvest festival known as Niiname-sai (???, also read as Shinj?-sai), celebrating the harvest of the Five Cereals. The classical chronicle the Nihon Shoki mentions a harvest ritual having taken place during the reign of the legendary Emperor Jimmu (660–585 BC), as well as more formalized harvest celebrations during the reign of Emperor Seinei (480–484 AD). Modern scholars can date the basic forms of niiname-sai to the time of Emperor Tenmu (667–686 AD).[5] Traditionally, it celebrated the year's hard work; during the Niiname-sai ceremony, the Emperor would dedicate the year's harvest to kami (spirits), and taste the rice for the first time.[6] The modern holiday was established after World War II in 1948 as a day to mark some of the changes of the postwar Constitution of Japan, including fundamental human rights and the expansion of worker's rights.[7] Currently, Niiname-sai is still held privately by the Imperial House of Japan on the same day as Labor Thanksgiving Day, which has become a public national holiday.[6] May 1 is also celebrated as Labor Day by many trade unions in Japan,[8] which hold large rallies and marches in Tokyo, Osaka and Nagoya.[citation needed] Celebration[edit] On this day, school children prepare cards or gifts to distribute to police officers, firefighters, hospital staffs, personnel of the Japan Self-Defense Force and the Japan Coast Guard and other people in the labor sector to show appreciation for their contributions to the country.[7] Companies review their accomplishments and congratulate their workers for their dedication.[citation needed] Families get together and have dinner at home on this holiday. In addition, individuals themselves are encouraged to relax and take care of themselves.[9] See also[edit] Japanese calendar References[edit] ^ Stuart D. B. Picken (2010). Historical Dictionary of Shinto. Scarecrow Press. p. 217. ISBN 978-0-810-87372-8. ^ "Thanksgiving in Japan: Labour Thanksgiving Day". Japan Rail Pass Travel Blog. October 30, 2020. Retrieved November 21, 2020. ^ "???????????" [About "national holiday"]. Cabinet Office (Japan). Retrieved February 28, 2021. ^ "???? ???? ?????????". Shinano Daily News (in Japanese). November 24, 2017. Retrieved November 24, 2017.[permanent dead link] ^ Ohnuki-Tierney, Emiko (November 14, 1994). Rice as self: Japanese identities through time. Princeton University Press. pp. 46–7. ISBN 978-0-691-02110-2. Retrieved November 22, 2011. ^ a b Morrill, Ann (August 2009). Thanksgiving and Other Harvest Festivals. Infobase Publishing. p. 51. ISBN 978-1-60413-096-6. Retrieved November 22, 2011. ^ a b Miller, Adam (November 22, 2011). "Labor Thanksgiving Day – ??????". Axiom Magazine. Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2011. ^ Hijirida, Kyoko; Yoshikawa, Muneo (1987). Japanese language and culture for business and travel. University of Hawaii Press. p. 253. ISBN 978-0-8248-1017-7. Retrieved November 22, 2011. ^ "2020?????? ????????????????". SKYWARD+ (in Japanese). Japan Airlines. August 1, 2020. Retrieved November 21, 2020. External links[edit] Kids Web Japan Labor Thanksgiving Day Celebration v t e Public holidays in Japan New Year's Day (Japanese New Year) Coming of Age Day National Foundation Day The Emperor's Birthday Vernal Equinox Day Sh?wa Day Constitution Memorial Day Greenery Day Children's Day (Tango no sekku) (Okinawa Memorial Day) Marine Day Mountain Day Respect for the Aged Day Autumnal Equinox Day Sports Day Culture Day Labor Thanksgiving Day Golden Week (Japan) Silver Week Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Labor_Thanksgiving_Day&oldid=1056785344" Categories: Public holidays in Japan National holidays November observances Christmas-linked holidays Labour festivals Labour days Hidden categories: CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2018 Articles to be expanded from October 2012 All articles to be expanded Articles needing translation from Japanese Wikipedia Articles containing Japanese-language text Infobox holiday fixed day All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Deutsch Español ????? Français ??? Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu ??? ??????? ??? ?????????? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 14:50 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement