https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Least-concern_species Least-concern species - Wikipedia Least-concern species From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search IUCN conservation category Conservation status by IUCN Red List category Extinct Extinct (EX) Extinct in the Wild (EW) (list) (list) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) Endangered (EN) Vulnerable (VU) (list) (list) (list) Lower Risk Near Threatened (NT) Conservation Dependent (CD) Least Concern (LC) (list) (list) Other categories Data Deficient (DD) Not Evaluated (NE) (list) Related topics International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) IUCN Red List NatureServe status Lists of organisms by population Comparison of Red list classes above and NatureServe status below v t e A least-concern species is a species that has been categorized by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as evaluated as not being a focus of species conservation because the specific species is still plentiful in the wild. They do not qualify as threatened, near threatened, or (before 2001) conservation dependent. The moose (Alces alces) is an example of a least concern species Species cannot be assigned the "Least Concern" category unless they have had their population status evaluated. That is, adequate information is needed to make a direct, or indirect, assessment of its risk of extinction based on its distribution or population status. Since 2001 the category has had the abbreviation "LC", following the IUCN 2001 Categories & Criteria (version 3.1).[1] However, around 20% of least concern taxa (3261 of 15636) in the IUCN database use the code "LR/lc", which indicates they have not been re-evaluated since 2000. Before 2001 "least concern" was a subcategory of the "Lower Risk" category and assigned the code "LR/lc" or lc. While "least concern" is not considered a red listed category by the IUCN, the 2006 IUCN Red List still assigns the category to 15636 taxa. The number of animal species listed in this category totals 14033 (which includes several undescribed species such as a frog from the genus Philautus[2]). There are also 101 animal subspecies listed and 1500 plant taxa (1410 species, 55 subspecies, and 35 varieties). No fungi or protista have the classification, though only four species in those kingdoms have been evaluated by the IUCN. Humans qualify for this category, because they are highly abundant, and in 2008 were formally assessed[3] as such by the IUCN. List of LC species[edit] Further information: Category:IUCN Red List least concern species Notes and references[edit] ^ "2001 Categories & Criteria (version 3.1)" (PDF). The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-01-28. Retrieved 2015-05-22. ^ "Philautus sp. nov. 'Kalpatta'". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Retrieved 2006-12-19. ^ Global Mammal Assessment Team 2008. (2008). "Homo sapiens (human)". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. 2008. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T136584A4313662.en. External links[edit] List of Least Concern species as identified by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species v t e Threatened species Template: Threatened species by region IUCN Red List Categories 1 Extinct Extinct (EX) Extinct in the Wild (EW) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) Endangered (EN) Vulnerable (VU) Lower risk Near Threatened (NT) Least Concern (LC) Lower Risk (LR) Conservation Dependent (LR/cd) Not fully assessed Data Deficient (DD) Not Evaluated (NE) Species Lists Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient WP categories Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient CITES Appendix I Appendix II Appendix III By taxa Endangered arthropods / spiders / Decline in insect populations Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates The world's 100 most threatened species Conservation Biodiversity action plan Biodiversity threats Conservation biology CITES ARKive Bird conservation Conservation status Conservation-reliant species Ecoregion conservation status Habitat destruction Latent extinction risk Rare species Vulnerability and susceptibility 1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics. Ecology portal Biology portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Least-concern_species&oldid=1056764490" Categories: IUCN Red List least concern species Least concern plants Biota by conservation status IUCN Red List Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans ??????? Asturianu ????? ?????????? ??????? ????????? Català ?eština Dansk Eesti Español Esperanto ????? Français Gaeilge Galego ??????? ??? ??????? ?????? Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Jawa Kurdî Latina Magyar ?????????? ?????? ????? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? Nederlands ?????? ??? Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Român? ??????? Shqip Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga Suomi Svenska ????? Taqbaylit ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t Winaray ?? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 11:48 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement