https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahdi Mahdi - Wikipedia Mahdi From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Prophesied Islamic eschatological figure This article is about the general concept of an eschatological saviour in Islam. For the twelfth Shiite Imam, see Muhammad al-Mahdi. For the Abbasid caliph, see al-Mahdi. For other uses, see Mahdi (disambiguation). Calligraphic representation of the name of Muhammad al-Mahdi as it appears in the Prophet's Mosque in Medina Part of a series on Islam Beliefs Oneness of God Prophets Revealed Books Angels Day of Resurrection Predestination Practices Profession of Faith Prayer Almsgiving Fasting Pilgrimage Texts Foundations Quran Sunnah (Hadith, Sirah) Aqidah (creed) Tafsir (exegesis) Qisas Al-Anbiya (prophets) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Sharia (law) History Timeline Muhammad Ahl al-Bayt Sahabah Rashidun Caliphate Imamate Medieval Islamic science Spread of Islam Succession to Muhammad Culture and society Academics Animals Art Calendar Children Circumcision Demographics Denominations Economics Education Exorcism Feminism Festivals Finance LGBT Madrasa Moral teachings Mosque Mysticism Philosophy Poetry Politics Proselytizing Science Slavery Social welfare Women Related topics Apostasy Criticism Muhammad Quran Hadith Other religions Islamism Violence terrorism war Islamophobia Jihad Jihadism Laws of war Glossary  Islam portal v t e Part of a series on Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Christian — Biblical texts — Book of Revelation Book of Daniel Olivet Discourse Sheep and Goats — Major figures — Jesus Two witnesses Four Horsemen Antichrist — Different views — Preterism Idealism Historicism Futurism — Millennialism — Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism — Other events — Events of Revelation Rapture Armageddon Seven Seals Second Coming Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Shiva Islamic — Figures — Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Isa Israfil Mahdi Dajjal Muhammad Al-Qa'im Sufyani Yajuj and Majuj — Events — Swallowing in Bayda Coming of the Mahdi Return of Isa Resurrection Jewish Messianism Book of Daniel Kabbalah Norse — Figures and items — Bound monster Gjallarhorn Líf and Lífþrasir Naglfar — Events — Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Vígríðr Taoist Li Hong Zoroastrian Frashokereti Saoshyant Inter-religious End times 2012 phenomenon Apocalypticism Millenarianism Last Judgment Resurrection of the dead Gog and Magog Messianic Age v t e The Mahdi (Arabic: ????????????, romanized: al-mahdiyy), meaning "the rightly guided one", is an eschatological Messianic figure who, according to Islamic belief, will appear at the end of times to rid the world of evil and injustice. In Islam, it is said that he will appear alongside Isa and establish the Divine kingdom of Allah.[1] There is no direct reference to the Mahdi in the Quran,[2] only in the hadith (the reports and traditions of Muhammad's teachings collected after his death). In most traditions, the Mahdi will arrive with 'Isa (Isa) to defeat Al-Masih ad-Dajjal ("the false Messiah").[3] Several canonical compilations of Hadith do include traditions concerning the Mahdi, although such traditions are notably absent from the two most-revered Sunni compilations, those of Bukhari and Muslim. Many orthodox Sunni theologians accordingly question Mahdist beliefs, but such beliefs form a necessary part of Muslim doctrine.[4] Although the concept of a Mahdi is not an essential doctrine in Islam, it is popular among Muslims.[5] It has been a part of the creed (aqida) of Muslims for 1400 years. Both Sunnis and Shia agree that the Mahdi will rule over the whole world and establish justice; however, they differ extensively on his attributes and status. Shi'ites have alternate views on which descendant of the Islamic Nabi (Prophet) Muhammad is the Mahdi. Twelvers, who form the majority of Shi'ites today, believe that Muhammad al-Mahdi, who is the son of the 11th Imam Al-Hasan al-Askari, is in occultation and is the awaited Mahdi. Tayyibi Isma'ili Shi'ites, including the Dawoodi Bohrah, believe that an Imam from the progeny of At-Tayyib Abu'l-Qasim is the current hidden Imam and Mahdi. The Bahá?í Faith believes that the Báb was the Mahdi, the spiritual return of the twelfth Shia Imam.[6][7] Contents 1 Historical development 2 Signs of the Appearance of Mahdi 2.1 Shia signs 2.2 Signs which both Sunni and Shia agree 3 Sunni Islam 3.1 References interpreted in ahadith 3.2 Historical views 3.3 Modern views 4 Shia Islam 4.1 Zaidiyyah and Isma'ilism 4.2 Twelver 4.2.1 Ahadith 4.2.2 The events of the uprising of Mahdi 4.2.3 The World before the advent of Mahdi 4.2.4 The world after the advent of Mahdi 5 Mahdist groups 5.1 Ahmadiyya 5.2 Nation of Islam 6 Persons claiming to be the Mahdi 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 9.1 Historical sources 9.2 Modern sources 10 External links Historical development The term Mahdi does not occur in the Quran. It is derived from the Arabic root h-d-y (?-?-?), commonly used to mean "divine guidance". The term al-Mahdi was employed from the beginning of Islam, but only as an honorific epithet and without any messianic significance.[2] As an honorific it has been used in some instances to describe Muhammad (by Hassan ibn Thabit), as well as Abraham, al-Husayn, and various Umayyad rulers (hud?t mahd?y?n).[2] During the second civil war (680–692), after the death of Mu?awiya, the term acquired a new meaning of a ruler who would restore Islam to its perfect form and restore justice after oppression.[2] In Kufa during the rebellion in 680s, Al-Mukhtar proclaimed Muhammad al-Hanafiyyah as the Mahdi in this heightened sense. Among the Umayyads, caliph Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik encouraged the belief that he was the Mahdi, and other Umayyad rulers, like Umar II, have been addressed as such in the panegyrics of Jarir and al-Farazdaq.[2] Early discussions about the identity of al-Mahdi by religious scholars can be traced back to the time after the Second Fitna. These discussions developed in different directions and were influenced by traditions (hadiths) attributed to Muhammad. In Umayyad times, scholars and traditionists not only differed on which caliph or rebel leader should be designated as Mahdi, but also on whether the Mahdi is a messianic figure and if signs and predictions of his time have been satisfied.[2] By the time of the Abbasid Revolution in the year 750, Mahdi was already a known concept. Evidence shows that the first Abbasid caliph As-Saffah assumed the title of "the Mahdi" for himself.[2] In Shia Islam, it seems likely that the attribution of messianic qualities to the Mahdi originated from two of the groups supporting al-Hanafiyyah: southern Arabian settlers and local recent converts in Iraq. They became known as Kaysanites, and introduced what later became two key aspects of the Shia's concept of the Mahdi. The first was the notion of return of the dead, particularly of the Imams. The second was that after al-Hanafiyyah's death they believed he was, in fact, in hiding in the Razwa mountains near Medina. This later developed into the doctrine known as the occultation.[8] The Mahdi appeared in early Shi'ite narratives, spread widely among Shi'ite groups and became dissociated from its historical figure, Muhammad al-Hanafiyyah. During the 10th century, based on these earlier beliefs, the doctrine of Mahdism was extensively expanded by Al-Kulayni, Ibrahim al-Qummi and Ibn Babawayh.[9] In particular, in the early 10th century, the doctrine of the occultation, which declares that the Twelfth Imam did not die but was concealed by God from the eyes of men, was expounded. The Mahdi became synonymous with the "Hidden Imam" who was thought to be in occultation awaiting the time that God has ordered for his return. Muhammad said: “I swear by Him Who sent me with the truth as a bearer of glad tidings, the Qaim from my offspring will surely become concealed from public view on the basis of a covenant that has been entrusted to him from me,[10] This return is envisaged as occurring shortly before the final Day of judgment.[11] In fact, the concept of the "hidden Imam" was attributed to several Imams in turn.[12] Some historians suggest that the term itself was probably introduced into Islam by southern Arabian tribes who had settled in Syria in the mid-7th century. They believed that the Mahdi would lead them back to their homeland and reestablish the Himyarite kingdom. They also believed that he would eventually conquer Constantinople.[8] It has also been suggested that the concept of the Mahdi may have been derived from messianic Judeo-Christian beliefs.[9][13] Accordingly, traditions were introduced to support certain political interests, especially Anti-Abbassid sentiments.[13][14] These traditions about the Mahdi appeared only at later times in hadith collections such as Jami' at-Tirmidhi and Sunan Abi Dawud, but are absent from the early works of Bukhari and Muslim.[15] Signs of the Appearance of Mahdi Main article: Signs of the appearance of Mahdi The Twelver Shia believe that the arrival of the Mahdi will be signaled by the following portents:[11] Shia signs The rise of Yamani, who is believed to preach support for Mahdi. The Scream of supernatural origin, coming from the sky calling man to defend Mahdi. The murder of Nafs al-Zakiyyah The vast majority of people who profess to be Muslim will be so only in name despite their practice of Islamic rites, and it will be they who will make war with the Mahdi. Before his coming will come the red death and the white death, killing two thirds of the world's population. The red death signifies violence and the white death is plague.[16] One third of the world's population will die from the red death and the other third from the white death. Several figures will appear: the Al-Harth, Al-Mansur, Shuaib bin Saleh and the Sufyani. There will be a great conflict in the land of Syria, until it is destroyed. Death and fear will afflict the people of Baghdad and Iraq. A fire will appear in the sky and a redness will cover them. Signs which both Sunni and Shia agree The coming of Sufyani, the enemy of the Mahdi who would raise an army against him. However, Majority of Muslims scholars consider the Hadith about Sufyani unreliable and weak (da‘eef).[17] The swallowing of an army composed of the Mahdi's enemies in Bayda which is located between Mecca and Medina. That he would rule for either seven, nine, or nineteen years. That it would be accompanied by raising the Black Standard flag in Khorasan. Sunni Islam Since Sunni Muslims has no established doctrine of Mahdi, compositions of Mahdi varies among Sunni scholars.,[18] others like Ibn Kathir elaborated a whole apocalyptic scenario which included prophecies about Mahdi, Jesus and Dajjal during the endtime.[19] Some Sunni beliefs deny the Mahdi as a separate figure, accordingly Jesus will fulfill this role and judge over mankind, thus Mahdi is considered as a title for Jesus, when he returns.[20] However the more common opinion among Sunni Muslims is, that the Mahdi is an expected ruler sent by God before the endtime to reestablish righteousness,[8] coincides with the Second Coming of Jesus Christ (Isa),[21][3] but, unlike most Shia traditions, Sunni Islam often do not believe the Mahdi has already been born.[22][23] Sunnis in general reject the Twelver Shi'ite principle of the Mahdi's occultation. Sunnis do, however, rely on traditionally canonical collections of narrations for derivations of the Mahdi's attributes and lineage. According to Sunan Abi Dawud, one of the six canonical books of Hadith in Sunni Islam, narrated by Umm Salamah, "The Prophet said: The Mahdi will be of my family, of the descendants of Fatimah."[24] In heavy contrast with Shia Islam, Sunnis have a much more human view of the Mahdi, who they believe will be nothing less than the most rightly guided Muslim of his time. He will be rectified in a single night (which is taken to mean that the provisions for his leadership and rule will be made in a single night). According to Sunan Ibn Majah, one of the six canonical collections of Hadith, narrated by 'Ali, "Mahdi is one of us, the people of the Household. Allah will rectify him in a single night."[25] According to Sunan Abi Dawud, "The Prophet said: The Mahdi will be of my stock, and will have a broad forehead [and] a prominent nose. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as it was filled with oppression and tyranny, and he will rule for seven years."[26][27] References interpreted in ahadith This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The Mahdi is frequently mentioned in Sunni hadith as establishing the caliphate. The following Sunni hadith make references to the Mahdi: Muhammad is quoted as saying about the Mahdi: His name will be like my name, and his father's name will be like my father's name[8] Even if the entire duration of the world's existence has already been exhausted and only one day is left before Doomsday, Allah will expand that day to such length of time as to accommodate the Caliphate of a person from my Ahlul-Bayt who will be called by my name. He will fill out the earth with peace and justice as it will have been full of injustice and tyranny (by then).[28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36] Umm Salama, a wife of Muhammad, is quoted as saying that; His [the Mahdi's] aim is to establish a moral system from which all superstitious faiths have been eliminated. In the same way that students enter Islam, so unbelievers will come to believe.[37] When the Mahdi appears, Allah will cause such power of vision and hearing to be manifested in believers that the Mahdi will call to the whole world from where he is, with no postman involved, and they will hear and even see him.[38] Historical views Sunni poets Jarir ibn Atiyah and Al-Farazdaq considered various Umayyads Caliphs, such as Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik, Umar II, Yazid II, and Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik to be the Mahdis. In Medina, among Sunni religious circles, the belief in Umar II being the Mahdi, "the just restorer of religion", was widespread. Said ibn al-Musayyib is said to identify Umar II as the Mahdi long before his reign. The Basran, Abu Qilabah, supported the view that Umar II was the Mahdi. Hasan al-Basri opposed the concept of a Muslim Messiah but believed that if there was the Mahdi, it was Umar II.[39] After the Umayyads, Sunnis held numerous Abbasid Caliphs to be the Mahdis.[40] Modern views A typical modernist in his views on the Mahdi, Abul Ala Maududi (1903–1979), the Pakistani Islamic revivalist, stated that the Mahdi will be a modern Islamic reformer/statesman, who will unite the Ummah and revolutionise the world according to the ideology of Islam, but will never claim to be the Mahdi, instead receiving posthumous recognition as such.[41] Some Islamic scholars reject Mahdi doctrine, including Allama Tamanna Imadi (1888–1972),[42] Allama Habibur Rahman Kandhalvi,[43] and Javed Ahmad Ghamidi.[44][45] Javed Ahmad Ghamidi writes in his book Mizan: Besides these, the coming of the Mahdi and that of Jesus from the heavens are also regarded as signs of the Day of Judgment. I have not mentioned them. The reason is that the narratives of the coming of the Mahdi do not conform to the standards of hadith criticism set forth by the muhaddithun. Some of them are weak and some fabricated; no doubt, some narratives, which are acceptable with regard to their chain of narration, inform us of the coming of a generous caliph; (Muslim, No: 7318) however, if they are deeply deliberated upon, it becomes evident that the caliph they refer to is Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz who was the last caliph from a Sunni standpoint. This prediction of the Prophet has thus materialized in his personality, word for word. One need not wait for any other Mahdi now. Ahmed Hulusi interpreted the Mahdi as a part of the inner self. Therefore, the Mahdi awakes in a person to defeat the inner Dajjal. The Mahdi stands for attaining selflessness and realizing a person's own existence as a part of God.[46] Imam al Hadith Abu Hayyan Saeed told that Mahdi traditions are contradicted each other. [96]. Shia Islam The Egyptian capital city of Cairo in 2014, where At-Tayyib Abu'l-Qasim, son of Fatimid Caliph Al-Amir bi-Ahkami'l-Lah, was born. Pictured are the Sultan Hasan and Al-Rifa'i Mosques. Zaidiyyah and Isma'ilism The Zaidiyyah and Isma'ilism branches of Shia Islam do not believe that the Mahdi is the twelfth Imam. In Ism???l?sm a distinct concept of the Mahdi developed, with select Ism???l? Imams representing the concept of Mahdi or Al-Qa'im (person) at various times. For the Sevener Ism???l?, the Im?mate ended with Isma'il ibn Ja'far, whose son Muhammad ibn Ismail was the expected Mahdi that Ja'far al-Sadiq had preached about. However, at this point the Ism???l? Im?ms according to the Nizari and Musta'li found areas where they would be able to be safe from the recently founded Abbasid Caliphate, which had defeated and seized control from the Umayyads in 750 CE. During the period of Ja'far, the Abbasid Caliphate replaced the Umayyads and began to aggressively oppose belief in an Imamate. Due to strong suppression by the Abbasids, the seventh Ism???l? Imam, Muhammad ibn Ismail, went into a period of occultation. During this period his representative, the D???, maintained the community. The names of the eighth, ninth, and tenth Imams are considered by some traditions to be "hidden", known only by their nicknames due to threats from the Abbasids. The 11th Imam, Abdullah al-Mahdi Billah, founded the Fatimid Caliphate in 909 CE in Ifriqiya (which includes present Tunisia in North Africa), ending the first occultation. In Ism???l? eyes this act again united the Imamate and the Caliphate in one person. The Fatimids then extended up to the central Maghreb (now including Morocco, Algeria and Libya). They entered and conquered Egypt in 969 CE during the reign of the fourteenth Imam, al-Mu'izz li-Din Allah, and made Cairo their capital. After the eighteenth Imam, al-Mustansir Billah, the Nizari sect believed that his son Nizar was his successor, while another Ism???l? branch known as the Mustaali (from whom the Dawoodi Bohra would eventually form), supported his other son, al-Musta'li. The Fatimid dynasty continued with al-Musta'li as both Imam and Caliph, and that joint position held until the 20th Imam, Al-Amir bi-Ahkami'l-Lah (1132 CE). At the death of 20th Imam Amir, one branch of the Mustaali faith claimed that he had transferred the Imamate to his son At-Tayyib Abu'l-Qasim, who was then two years old. Tayyeb's claim to the imamate was endorsed by the Hurrah al-Malika ("the Noble Queen") Arwa al-Sulayhi, the Queen of Yemen, who created the office of the Dai al-Mutlaq to administer the community in the Imam's absence. Zoeb bin Moosa (d.546 AH/1151 CE) was the first Dai-ul-Mutlaq, and lived and died in Haus, Yemen.[47] Tayyibis (which include the Dawoodi Bohra) believe the second and current period of occultation (satr) began after Imam Tayyeb went into seclusion and Imam from his progeny is very much present as Mahdi on earth every time. The Nizari Ismailis maintain that the Shi'a Ismaili Imams and Ismaili Muslim thinkers have explained that al-Mahdi is not a single person but actually a function undertaken by some of the hereditary Shi'a Ismaili Imams from the progeny of Muhammad and Imam 'Ali ibn Abi Talib. Throughout history, only a certain number of Imams have had the practical means to undertake such a grand mission of establishing justice and equity and removing oppression and injustice from the world because most of the Ismaili Imams have been heavily persecuted. For example, the founder of the Fatimid Caliphate, Imam 'Abdullah al-Mahdi, and the Fatimid-Imam Caliphs each performed the function or mission of the Mahdi. The Mahdi is therefore a mission carried out by several Shi'a Ismaili Imams and not a specific individual. Today, the 49th hereditary Ismaili Imam, Shah Karim al-Husayni Aga Khan IV, is undertaking the "Mahdi-ist" mission – the functions of the Mahdi – through the work of his institutions in the Aga Khan Development Network. Twelver Main article: Hujjat-Allah al-Mahdi The Mosque of Al-Askari in Samarra, Iraq, 2017. This is where Twelver Imams Ali al-Hadi and Al-Hasan al-Askari, the resting place of the father and grandfather of the Twelver Shia Mahdi. The Twelver branch Shia Muslims belief that the Mahdi is their twelfth and last in the chain of the Purified Imams. He was born on the 15th of Shaban 255 A.H. His name is Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Mahdi and titles are Hujjat, Qaim, Muntazar, Sahibuzzaman, and Khalaf al-Saleh, among others, the same names and agnomen of Muhammad. His birth was kept secret as the tyrant Abbasid ruler had planned to eliminate him, being aware of the fact that a person will be born in the family of the prophet who will appear to remove all types of corruption and tyranny. Except for the most trusted of the shias and his own family, no one knew of his existence. At the age of five, after the death of Hasan Askari the eleventh Imam, the responsibility of guiding the Shias (ie Imamat) was transferred upon him, in the same way as Prophet Yahya and Prophet Isa who were favoured by prophethood in their infancy.[48] Due to various efforts of the enemies to eliminate him, he was entrusted to occultation, which consist of two phases, one is short and the other is prolonged [49] According to Twelver Shias, the main goal of the Mahdi will be to establish an Islamic state and to apply Islamic laws that were revealed to Muhammad.[50] The Mahdi is believed to be the Twelfth Imam, Hujjat-Allah al-Mahdi.[51] They believe that the Twelfth Imam will return from the occultation as the Mahdi with "a company of his chosen ones," and his enemies will be led by the Dajjal and the Sufyani. The two armies will fight "one final apocalyptic battle" where the Shia Muslims believe that Mahdi and his forces will prevail over evil. Both the Shia and Sunni strongly believe that Isa (Jesus) will return after the Mahdi has arrived.[11][52] Jamkaran Mosque in Qom, Iran where Hassan ibn Muthlih Jamkarani is reported to have met the Twelver's 12th Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi. For Twelvers, the Mahdi was born but disappeared, and would remain hidden from humanity until he reappears to bring justice to the world, a doctrine known as the Occultation. For them, this Imam in occultation is Hujjat-Allah al-Mahdi, the Twelfth Imam. Shia Quran commentators such as Shaikh Tabarsi in his book Majma' al-Bayan have interpreted nine verses referring to the Mahdi in the Quran; and Muhammaed Hussain Tabatabai in book Tafsir al-Mizan have interpreted nine verses referring to the Mahdi in the Quran (eight of them are the same as those interpreted by Shaykh Tabarsi).[53][54] Twelver Shi'ites (as the main branch of Shia, which consists of 85% of all Shia Muslims)[55][56][57][58] claim that the Imam al-Mahdi, who went into occultation around 256/873-874, is the promised Mahdi, who will appear before the day of Judgement, to restore justice and equity on earth.[59] In Shia Islam, the Mahdi is associated with the belief in the occultation, that the Mahdi is a "hidden Imam" who has already been born and who will one day return alongside Jesus to fill the world with justice.[22] The promised Mahdi, who is usually mentioned in Shia Islam by his title of Imam-Al-Asr (the Imam of the "Period") and Sahib al-Zaman (the Lord of the Age), is the son of the eleventh Imam. His name is the same as that of the Prophet of Islam. According to Shia Islam, Mahdi was born in Samarra in 868 and until 872 when his father was martyred, lived under his father's care and tutelage. He was hidden from public view and only a few of the elite among the Shi'ah were able to meet him.[60] Belief in the messianic Imam is not merely a part of the Twelver creed, but the foundation.[59] Shias believe that after the martyrdom of his father he became Imam and by Divine Command went into occultation (ghaybat). Thereafter he appeared only to his deputies (na'ib) and even then only in exceptional circumstances.[60] In their perspective, the Mahdi appointed personal deputy Uthman ibn Sa'id 'Umari, one of the companions of his father and grandfather who was his confidant and trusted friend. Through his deputy Mahdi would answer the demands and questions of the Shias. After Uthman ibn Sa'id, his son Muhammad ibn Uthman Umari was appointed the deputy of him. After the death of Muhammad ibn Uthman, Abu'l Qasim Husayn ibn Ruh Nawbakhti was the special deputy, and after his death Ali ibn Muhammad Simmari was chosen for this task.[60] A few days before the death of Ali ibn Muhammad Sammari in 939 CE, an order was issued by the Mahdi, stating that in six days, Ali would die. Henceforth the special deputation of the Imam would come to an end and the major occultation (ghaybat-i kubra) would begin and would continue until the day God grants permission to the Imam to manifest himself.[60] In the Twelver view, the occultation of Mahdi is, therefore, divided into two parts: the first, the minor occultation (ghaybat-i sughra) which began in 872 and ended in 939, lasting about seventy years; the second, the major occultation which commenced in 939 and will continue as long as God wills it. In a hadith upon whose authenticity Shia and Sunni agree, Muhammad has said, "If there were to remain in the life of the world but one day, God would prolong that day until He sends in it a man from my community and my household. His name will be the same as my name. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as it was filled with oppression and tyranny."[60][61] Shia traditions also state that the Mahdi be "a young man of medium stature with a handsome face" and black hair and beard. "He will not come in an odd year [...] will appear in Mecca between the corner of the Kaaba and the station of Abraham and people will witness him there.[11] Ahadith This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Muhammad is reported in hadith to have said: The Mahdi is the protector of the knowledge, the heir to the knowledge of all the prophets, and is aware of all things.[62][63] People will flee from him [the Mahdi] as sheep flee from the shepherd. Later, people will begin to look for a purifier. But since they can find none to help them but him, they will begin to run to him.[64] When matters are entrusted to competent [the Mahdi], Almighty God will raise the lowest part of the world for him, and lower the highest places. So much that he will see the whole world as if in the palm of his hand. Which of you cannot see even a single hair in the palm of his hand?[65] In the time of the Mahdi, a Muslim in the East will be able to see his Muslim brother in the West, and he in the West will see him in the East.[66] Muhammad al-Baqir, the Fourth (Isma'ili) or Fifth (Twelver) Imam said of the Mahdi: The Master of the Command was named as the Mahdi because he will dig out the Torah and other heavenly books from the cave in Antioch. He will judge among the people of the Torah according to the Torah; among the people of the Gospel according to the Gospel; among the people of the Psalms in accordance with the Psalms; among the people of the Qur'an in accordance with the Qur'an. Ja'far al-Sadiq, the Sixth Imam, made the following prophecies: Abu Bashir says: When I asked Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, "O son of the Messenger of God! Who is the Mahdi (qa'im) of your clan (ahl al-bayt)?", he replied: "The Mahdi will conquer the world; at that time the world will be illuminated by the light of God, and everywhere in which those other than God are worshipped will become places where God is worshiped; and even if the polytheists do not wish it, the only faith on that day will be the religion of God.[67] Additionally, there are differences in hadiths regarding the day of the uprising of the Mahdi. Nawroz and Ashura both are considered to be specified for the day of the uprising. According to Ja'far al-Sadiq, the Mahdi will appear on a Friday. His father, Muhammad al-Baqir, also emphasized on the day of Ashura being the day of the uprising, and that his reappearance will be announced from the heavens, after which the Mahdi will lean against the wall of the Kaaba, and invite the people towards truth. Muhammad al-Baqir narrated that Mahdi would appear after the night prayers, and that he would possess a banner and shirt of Mohammed with him.[68] The events of the uprising of Mahdi According to Ja'far al-Sadiq, the sixth in the chain of the twelve imams of the Shia, Mahdi will appear on a Friday. Muhammad al-Baqir also emphasizes on the day of Ashura being the day of the uprising. His reappearance will be announced from the heavens.[68] Muhammad al-Baqir says regarding the reappearance of Mahdi, “The Mahdi (‘a) will rise up at a time when the helm of affairs would be in the hands of tyrants.” Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 77. [69] The World before the advent of Mahdi Muhammad al-Baqir said: Mahdi will not rise up except at a time full of fear and dread. Prophet Muhammad said, “After me the caliphate will rule; after the caliphs, the emirs will come, followed by kings, and after them tyrants and oppressors will rule, then the Mahdi will reappear.”[70][71][72] Religious Conditions Muhammad in one of his hadith, narrates the religious condition of Islam saying that it will be such that Muslims will be Muslims just for namesake, people will not recognize God and people will not know what is monotheism. Mosques will lose their importance. More attention will be given to the beautification of the structure devoid of the main aim of providing guidance and enlightenment. The plight of religion will be such that it will be sold at a miserable price. Believers in the morning will turn into infidels by evening. The rulings of the Quran will be denied.Muhammad said: “A period will come to pass for my ummah in which nothing will be left of Islam but its name, and there will be no trace of the Qur’an but its form and outline. The Muslims will be called Muslims in name but of all the people they will be the most alien to Islam.” The Ulama who are supposed to be the protectors of God's religion and the ones who guide the people will be ready to compromise with the tyrant kings and the self-centred rulers. Muhammad says in this regard,“The jurists (fuqaha) of those days will be the worst jurists under heaven. Sedition and chaos will start from them and will also return to them.”[73][74] Social conditions The social condition would be such that the powerful will oppress the weaker. People will be afflicted by immodesty and family insecurities. Even the most inhumane behavior will not be considered as indecent and gradually will become a normal act. Corruption and immorality will no longer be considered as indecent rather it would be counted as something natural and normal. It would be hard to find someone who would want to prevent it. People will be encouraged to have fewer children due to economic problems and lack of facilities. The number of women will exceed the number of men. The hadith of Muhammed says in this regard, "Men will die and women will remain." The aggressive and dominant powers of the world will cause insecurity to the weaker nations and their rights will be violated. Horrifying crimes such as executing young boys, burning children by dipping them into molten liquids, cutting human beings into pieces by axes and iron saws, molesting women, and killing the fetus by slitting their wombs, will be committed under the watchful eyes of the so-called superpower countries. The extent of the loss of Islamic values can be predicted by Muhammad's hadith, “The Day of Resurrection will not commence unless a woman would be openly taken away from her guardian in broad daylight and be molested in public in the middle of the road and no one would condemn and prevent this. The best among the people is he who will say: ‘I wish you would have gone a bit away from the middle of the road and done your work!’" On enquiring about the time of the reappearance of Mahdi, Muhammad al-Baqir replied, “It will be at the time when men would resemble women and women would act like men; at the time when men would suffice themselves with men (i.e. they would do sodomy), and so would women with other women (i.e. they would engage in lesbianism).”[75][76][77] Economic Conditions With frequent wars, corruption, and bad governance, the economic condition will globally decline. Scarce and untimely rains will affect agriculture. Fruits and crops will be destroyed. Water bodies may dry up leading to famine. Due to the lack of agricultural products, a recession in trade will prevail. Inflation will rise, leading to the inadequacy of income. The condition of poverty and starvation will be such that people will barter their daughters and wives in exchange for a small amount of food.[78] Insecurities People would wish for death upon seeing the brutality of each other. One of the companions of the prophet narrates a hadith in this regard “Verily, a time shall come upon you when man will wish for his death although he would not be under the pressure of poverty and indigence.” Slavery will prevail. Epidemics may occur frequently. Before the advent of Mahdi 'Red Death and White Death' may occur frequently. Red Death refers to war killings and White death means a plague. The whole of the world would be in despair and disappointment and people would not find any place to take refuge. A hadith of Muhammad al Baqir the fifth Imam of the Twelver Shias indicates the truth about the situation. “You will not see him while waiting for him except at the time when you become like a dead she-goat under the clutches of a fierce animal for which it makes no difference how she was brought. At that time there would be neither a place away from aggression where you could go nor a sanctuary where you could seek refuge".[79] War and Bloodshed Before the reappearance of the Mahdi, mass killings will increase and bloodshed and usurpation of the property will be regarded as lawful. The whole of the world will be afflicted by the war in such a way that while it subsides in a certain area, it will ablaze in another area. According to a hadith of Muhammad, no one would be free from the sedition of the end times. It would start from Syria turning towards Iraq spreading to the whole of the Arabian peninsula. A hadith from [Ali] adds in this regard, "Mahdi will not appear unless one-third of the people are killed; another one-third die, and the remaining one-third survive.” A number of people will die due to contagious diseases caused by chemicals and biological weapons used in the war.[80] The world after the advent of Mahdi When the Mahdi finally assumes control of the government, the world will for some time have been in a state of utter turmoil. Several Governments and political parties will have failed to provide peace, security, and economic improvement to the world.The Mahdi's government will be just in such a manner that the living will wish that their dead could come alive to live under a governance of such blessed peace and tranquility. Kufa will be the political capital of Mahdi. He will reside in Al-Sahlah Mosque where all the Prophets have visited in the past. All the believers will visit the city of Kufa. Muhammed al Fadil says in this regard, “The Day of Resurrection will not come to pass unless all the believers gather in Kufah.[81] Economic Condition The earth will unveil all its hidden treasures and they would be visible to all. The rivers will start flowing due to regular rainfalls, The famine situation will change and the vegetation will flourish. The farms will yield crops for starving people. Even the desert regions like Mecca and Madina will turn into vegetation and there will be palm-groves all over the area. Zakat and khums will be equally distributed amongst the people. In his governance, the rulers will be generous and will bestow the people with abundance. Prominent Shia scholar Mohammad Baqer Majlesi in his famous book Bihar al-Anwar interprets a hadith “Come and take those things for the sake of which you used to sever relationships, shed blood and commit sins. He will give wealth such that no one before him had ever done.[82] Science and Technology Mahdi will introduce new aspects of knowledge. It will reach its peak in the era of Mahdi. There will be advancements in the field of communications to such an extent that people will be able to find solutions on their palms. With regard to the development of transportation, Muhammad al-Baqir said: Mahdi will ride on the clouds with the help of thunder and lightning —?Muhammad al-Baqir This hadith interprets that there will be major advancements in the field of Transportation. Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: . Knowledge and learning are twenty-seven letters, and everything that the prophets have brought is only two letters; so, now, the people are unaware (of these letters) except (juz’an) these two. When our Qa’im rises up, he will bring out the other twenty-five letters, spreading and extending them among the people. He will also attach the two letters and a total of twenty-seven letters will be distributed among the people —?Imam as-Sadiq It can be deduced from this hadith that although mankind progresses in terms of knowledge and learning, in the period of Mahdi it will suddenly attain growth and expansion thirteen times more. [83] [84][85][64] Mahdist groups Ahmadiyya Main article: Ahmadiyya See also: Prophethood in Ahmadiyya Islam and Jesus in Ahmadiyya Islam In Ahmadiyya belief the terms "Messiah" and "Mahdi" are synonymous terms for one and the same person. According to Ahmadiyya thought the prophesied eschatological figures of Christianity and Islam, the Messiah and Mahdi, were in fact to be fulfilled in one person who was to represent all previous prophets.[86] The prophecies concerning the Mahdi or the Second Coming of Jesus are seen by Ahmadis as metaphorical and subject to interpretation. It is argued that one was to be born and rise within the dispensation of Muhammad, who by virtue of his similarity and affinity with Jesus, and the similarity in nature, temperament and disposition of the people of Jesus' time and the people of the time of the promised one (the Mahdi) is called by the same name.[87] These prophecies according to Ahmadi Muslims have been fulfilled in the person of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835–1908), the founder of the Ahmadiyya Movement, who claimed to be divinely appointed as the second coming of Jesus and the Mahdi in 1891 around the same point in time after Muhammad as Jesus had appeared after Moses (thirteen centuries). Contrary to mainstream Islam, the Ahmadis do not believe that Jesus is alive in heaven, but claim that he survived the crucifixion and migrated towards the east where he died a natural death and that Ghulam Ahmad was only the promised spiritual second coming and likeness of Jesus, the promised Messiah and Mahdi.[88][89] Nation of Islam Main articles: Nation of Islam and Wallace Fard Muhammad The Nation of Islam, founded by Wallace Fard Muhammad claimed that he was the Mahdi as well as Allah incarnate which is considered Shirk by majority of the Muslim sects. Point #12 of The Nation's "What the Muslims Want/What the Muslims Believe" says "We Believe that Allah (God) appeared in the Person of Master W. Fard Muhammad, July, 1930; the long-awaited “Messiah” of the Christians and the “Mahdi” of the Muslims." This is not recognized by other Muslims. Persons claiming to be the Mahdi Main article: List of Mahdi claimants Throughout history, various individuals have claimed to be or were proclaimed to be the Mahdi. These have included Muhammad Jaunpuri, founder of the Mahdavia sect; the Báb (Sayyid Ali Muhammad), founder of Bábism; Muhammad Ahmad, who established the Mahdist State in Sudan in the late 19th century; Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, founder of the Ahmadiyya movement; Massoud Rajavi, leader of the MEK;[90] Riaz Ahmed Gohar Shahi; and Wallace Fard Muhammad, founder of the Nation of Islam.[91] See also Islam portal Mahdism Last Roman Emperor Moshiach List of Islamic terms in Arabic Mahdaviat (disambiguation) Masih ad-Dajjal People claiming to be the Mahdi Parousia Sufyani Du'a al-Faraj References Constructs such as ibid., loc. cit. and idem are discouraged by Wikipedia's style guide for footnotes, as they are easily broken. Please improve this article by replacing them with named references (quick guide), or an abbreviated title. (January 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) ^ "Hadith – Chapters on Al-Fitan – Jami' at-Tirmidhi – Sunnah.com – Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (??? ???? ???? ? ???)". sunnah.com. Retrieved 3 March 2017. ^ a b c d e f g Madelung, Wilferd (1986). "al-Mahd?". Encyclopaedia of Islam. 5 (2nd ed.). Brill Academic Publishers. pp. 1230–8. ISBN 90-04-09419-9. ^ a b Sonn (2004) p. 209 ^ "mahdi | Definition, Islam, & Eschatology". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 31 January 2021. ^ Shahzad Bashir (2003). Messianic Hopes and Mystical Visions: The N?rbakhsh?ya Between Medieval and Modern Islam. University of South Carolina Press. ISBN 978-1-570-03495-4 page 24 ^ Effendi, Shoghi (1974). God Passes By. National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of the United States. pp. 57–58. LCCN 44-51036. ^ Effendi, Shoghi (1932). The Dawn Breakers. Kingsport Press. pp. xxix–xxx. LCCN 32-8946. ^ a b c d Arjomand, Said Amir (December 2007). "Islam in Iran vi., the Concept of Mahdi in Sunni Islam". Encyclopaedia Iranica. XIV (Fasc. 2): 134–136. ^ a b Kohlberg, Etan (24 December 2009). "From Imamiyya to Ithna-ashariyya". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies. 39 (3): 521–534. doi:10.1017/S0041977X00050989. ^ Muhammad Zakariya, al-Sahih wa al-Mu’tabar min Akhbar al-Hujjah al-Muntazar (Majmu’at al-Rasid; 1st edition, 1434 H), p. 14, # 1 ^ a b c d Momen, Moojan (1985). An introduction to Shi?i Islam : the history and doctrines of Twelver Shi?ism. G. Ronald. pp. 75, 166–168. ISBN 9780853982005. ^ Henry, Corbin (1993). History of Islamic philosophy (Reprinted. ed.). Kegan Paul International. p. 68. ISBN 9780710304162. ^ a b Arjomand, Amir (2000). "Origins and Development of Apocalypticism and Messianism in Early Islam: 610-750 CE". Oslo: Congress of the International Committee of the Historical Sciences. Cite journal requires |journal= (help) ^ Reza, Saiyed Jafar (2012). The essence of Islam. Concept Pub. Co. p. 57. ISBN 9788180698323. ^ Glassé, Cyril, ed. (2001). "Mahdi". The new encyclopedia of Islam. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira (Rowman & Littlefield). p. 280. ISBN 0-7591-0190-6. ^ "The Signs of the Reappearance of the Twelfth Imam (ajtf)". Al-Islam.org. 6 December 2012. ^ "As-Sufyaani – da'eef by Dr at-Tareefi, Shaykh Hammood at-Tuwaijri, Shaykh Ibn 'Uthaymeen, Dr Haatim al-'Awni.". How sound is the hadith of as-Sufyaani?. Muhammad Al-Munajjid. 2021. ^ Hong Beom Rhee Asian Millenarianism: An Interdisciplinary Study of the Taiping and Tonghak Rebellions in a Global Context Cambria Press 2006 ISBN 978-1-934-04342-4 page 230 ^ Oddbjørn Leirvik Images of Jesus Christ in Islam: 2nd Edition A&C Black ISBN 978-1-441-18160-2 page 41 ^ John L. Esposito Oxford Dictionary of Islam Oxford University Press ISBN 978-0-195-12559-7 page 75 ^ Abu 'Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma'il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah al-Bukhari al-Ju'fi, al-Jami' al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mus?afa Dib al-Bagha], vol. 3, p. 1272, # 3264 ^ a b "Comparison of Shias and Sunnis". Religionfacts.com. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 4 May 2011. ^ "The Birth of the Savior of the World". Al-Islam.org. 7 April 2015. Retrieved 13 August 2020. ^ "Hadith – The Promised Deliverer (Kitab Al-Mahdi) – Sunan Abi Dawud – Sunnah.com – Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (??? ???? ???? ? ???)". sunnah.com. ^ "Hadith – Book of Tribulations – Sunan Ibn Majah – Sunnah.com – Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (??? ???? ???? ? ???)". sunnah.com. ^ "Hadith – The Promised Deliverer (Kitab Al-Mahdi) – Sunan Abi Dawud – Sunnah.com – Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (??? ???? ???? ? ???)". sunnah.com. ^ "16. Issues Of The Ghaybah: Reason For The Disappearance". Al-Islam.org. 7 April 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2020. ^ Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v2, p86, v9, pp 74–75 ^ Sunan Abu Dawood, v2, p7 ^ Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal v1, pp 84,376; V3, p63 ^ Al-Mustadrak alaa al-Sahihainby al-Hakim, v4, p557 ^ Al-Jaami' al-Saghîr, by Al-Suyuti, pp 2,160 ^ al-Urful Wardi, by Al-Suyuti, p2 ^ Kanz al-Ummal, v7 P186 ^ Sharh al-Mawahib al-Ladunniyyah, by al-Zurqani, v5, p348 ^ Fat'h al-Mugheeth, by Al-Sakhawi, v3, p41 ^ (Vizier Mustafa, Emergence of Islam, p. 171 ^ Muntakab al Adhhar, p. 483 ^ Jan Olaf Blichfeldt (1985). Early Mahdism: Politics and Religion in the Formative Period of Islam. p. 1231 ^ Ibid., 1233 ^ Syed Maududi, Tajdeed-o-Ahyaa-e-Deen, Islamic Publications Limited, Lahore, Pakistan, Chapeter: Imam Mehdi ^ Allama Tamanna Imadi, Intizar-e-Mehdi-o-Maseeh, Al-Rahman Publishing Trust, Karachi, Pakistan ^ Allama Habib-ur-Rahman Kandhlwi, Mehdaviyyat nay Islam ko Kiya Diya, Anjuman Uswa-e-Hasna, Karachi, Pakistan ^ "Al-Mawrid". Al-Mawrid. 25 September 2009. Archived from the original on 29 February 2012. Retrieved 29 April 2012. ^ Allama Iqbal, Iqbal Nama, Volume 2, Bazm-e-Iqbal, Lahore, Pakistan, Letter No. 87 ^ Ahmed Hulusi The Observing One Softcover ISBN 978-0-615-63664-1 page 48-49 ^ Daftary, Farhad (1990). The Ism???l?s: Their history and doctrines. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. p. 104. ISBN 0-521-42974-9. ^ Quran: Sura Maryam, Ayat 12 and 30. ^ Al Kafi Vol. 1 Pg.340; Ghaibat Nomani Pg. 180. ^ Nasr, Sayyed Hossein. "Expectation of the Millennium : Shiìsm in History," State University of New York Press, 1989, p. 19, ISBN 978-0-88706-843-0 ^ "mahd?." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. ^ "Chapter 4". Al-Islam.org. 21 May 2018. ^ "Mahdi in the Quran According to Shi'ite Quran Commentators". Al-Islam.org. 30 September 2015. ^ "Chapter 3: Mahdi in classical and modern". Al-Islam.org. 30 September 2015. ^ "Shia Islam's Holiest Sites". WorldAtlas. 25 April 2017. ^ "World Population Clock: 7.5 Billion People (2017) – Worldometers". www.worldometers.info. ^ Atlas of the Middle East (Second ed.). Washington D.C: National Geographic 2008 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFAtlas_of_the_Middle_East_(Second_ed.)._Washington_D.C:_National_Geographic2008 (help) ^ The World Factbook 2010 & Retrieved 2010-08-25. harvnb error: no target: CITEREFThe_World_Factbook_2010Retrieved_2010-08-25. (help) ^ a b Sachedina, Abdulaziz (1978). "A Treatise on the Occultation of the Twelfth Im?mite Imam". Studia Islamica. 105 (48): 109–124. doi:10.2307/1595355. JSTOR 4099480. – via JSTOR (subscription required) ^ a b c d e Tabatabai, Sayyid Muhammad Hossein (1975). Shi'ite Islam (PDF) (First ed.). State University of New York Press. pp. 210–211 (185–186 in the ebook). ISBN 0-87395-272-3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2014. ^ Ibn Masud, Abdallah. al Fusul al Muhimmah. p. 271. ^ Bihar al-Anwar: 95: 378; 102: 67, 117 ^ Mikyaal al-Makaarem: 1: 49 ^ a b Bihar al-Anwar: 52: 326 ^ Bihar al-Anwar: 5: 328 ^ Bihar al-Anwar: 52: 391 ^ Bihar al-Anwar: 51: 146 ^ a b "The Uprising of the Imam of the Time ('atfs)". Al-Islam.org. 12 September 2012. ^ "The Despotism of Governments". An overview of the Mahdis Government. 12 September 2012. ^ Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 22, p. 375; Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 221; Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 5, p. 456; Kashf al-Ghumah, vol. 3, p. 264; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 596. ^ Najmuddin Tabasi. "The uprising of the Imam". An Overview of Mahdis Government. ^ Sayyid Sa'eed Akhtar Rizvi. "Some signs of the day of Resurrection". Day of Judgement. ^ Thawab al-A'mal, p. 301; Jami' al-Akhbar, p. 129; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 190. ^ "Religious Conditions". An overview of the Mahdis Government. ^ Kamaluddin, vol. 1, p. 331. ^ 'Iqd ad-Darar, p. 333; Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 495. ^ "Social Conditions". An overview of the Mahdis Government. ^ "Economic Conditions". An overview of the Mahdis Government. ^ "Security before the advent". An overview of the Mahdis Government. ^ "Wars, killings and seditions". An overview of the Mahdis Government. ^ "The government of truth". An overview of the Mahdis Government. ^ "Harmony with nature". The golden era of reappearance. Associaiton of Imam Mahdi. 25 November 2014. ^ Mohammed Ali Shomali. "Science and Technology". The Globe before and after the advent of Imam Mahdi-Part 2. ^ Khara’ij: 2: 841 ^ Mukhtasar Basa’ir ad-Darajat: 117 ^ "The Holy Quran". Alislam.org. Retrieved 9 November 2012. ^ Friedmann, Yohanan (2003). Prophecy Continuous: Aspects of Ahmadi Religious Thought and its Medieval Background. Oxford University Press. p. 121. ^ "Jesus: A humble prophet of God". Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. Retrieved 30 April 2014. ^ Robinson, Francis. "Prophets without honour? Ahmad and the Ahmadiyya". History Today 40 (June): 46. ^ Merat, Arron (9 November 2018). "Terrorists, cultists – or champions of Iranian democracy? The wild wild story of the MEK". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 10 November 2018. ^ "The Muslim Program". Nation of Islam. 8 October 2013. Further reading Historical sources "Muqaddimah Ibn al-Salah", Sahih al-Bukhari, Dar al-Ma'aarif, pp. 160–169 Ja'far al-Sadiq, Al-Ghaybah (The occultation): narrations from the prophecies of al-Mahdi by Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, Mihrab Publishers Bihar al-Anwar Modern sources Baqar al-Majlisi, Muhammad, ed. (2003), Kitab al-Ghaybat, Qom: Ansariyan Publications Doi, A. R. I. (1971) [1971-1972], "The Yoruba Mahd?", Journal of Religion in Africa, 4 (2): 119–136, doi:10.1163/157006671x00070, JSTOR 1594738 Martin, Richard C., ed. (2004), "Mahdi", Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim world, Thompson Gale Momen, Moojan (1985), An introduction to Shi'i Islam, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, ISBN 0-300-03531-4 Shauhat Ali, Millenarian and Messianic Tendencies in Islamic Thought (Lahore: Publishers United, 1993) Timothy Furnish, Holiest Wars: Islamic Mahdis, Jihad and Osama Bin Laden (Westport: Praeger, 2005) ISBN 0-275-98383-8 Abdulaziz Abdulhussein Sachedina, Islamic Messianism: The Idea of the Mahdi in Twelver Shi'ism (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1981) ISBN 0-87395-458-0 Syaikh Hisyam Kabbani, The Approach of Armageddon (Islamic Supreme Council of America, 2002) ISBN 1-930409-20-6 "Mahd?", Encyclopædia Britannica, 2008, retrieved 4 July 2010 The Golden Era of Reappearance (PDF). www.almuntazar.in. Retrieved 14 July 2020. by Association of Imam Mahdi Mhammed Baqar Faqeeh Imani,Fauze Akbar, ed (1387 A.H), published Ansarul Mahdi, ISBN 964-7941-15-3 Ash Sheikh Ali Al Koorani, Moajam Al Ahadees al Imam Mehdi, ed (1411 A.H) External links Wikiquote has quotations related to: Mahdi Look up mahdi in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article "Mahdi". Signs of the Followers of Mahdi (Sunni Islamic View) Ismaili Gnosis "Imam Husain (a.s.) and Imam Mahdi (a.s.)". www.almuntazar.in. Retrieved 14 July 2020. v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Doomsday Clock Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Relativistic kinetic kill vehicle Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Nuclear warfare Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence Existential risk from artificial intelligence AI takeover Technological singularity Transhumanism Year 2000 problem Year 2038 problem Year 10,000 problem Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Doomsday argument Self-Indication Assumption Doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust winter famine cobalt Societal collapse Collapsology World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Climate apocalypse Deforestation Desertification Extinction risk from global warming Tipping points in the climate system Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony Collapse Disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of Desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Dispensationalism Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Lake of fire Number of the Beast Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of Perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Post-tribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Revelation 12 sign prophecy World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films List of fictional doomsday devices Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) Other Encyclopedia of Islam Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mahdi&oldid=1056168737" Categories: Imams Islamic terminology Messianism Religious leadership roles Mahdism Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Harv and Sfn no-target errors Subscription required using via Pages containing links to subscription-only content Wikipedia semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2018 Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles lacking reliable references from November 2017 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with ibid from January 2021 Articles with GND identifiers Articles with TDV?A identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Languages Alemannisch ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français ??? Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano ????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??????? Norsk bokmål ?????? Polski Português Român? ??????? Shqip Simple English Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 20 November 2021, at 05:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahdi Mahdi - Wikipedia Mahdi From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Prophesied Islamic eschatological figure This article is about the general concept of an eschatological saviour in Islam. For the twelfth Shiite Imam, see Muhammad al-Mahdi. For the Abbasid caliph, see al-Mahdi. For other uses, see Mahdi (disambiguation). Calligraphic representation of the name of Muhammad al-Mahdi as it appears in the Prophet's Mosque in Medina Part of a series on Islam Beliefs Oneness of God Prophets Revealed Books Angels Day of Resurrection Predestination Practices Profession of Faith Prayer Almsgiving Fasting Pilgrimage Texts Foundations Quran Sunnah (Hadith, Sirah) Aqidah (creed) Tafsir (exegesis) Qisas Al-Anbiya (prophets) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Sharia (law) History Timeline Muhammad Ahl al-Bayt Sahabah Rashidun Caliphate Imamate Medieval Islamic science Spread of Islam Succession to Muhammad Culture and society Academics Animals Art Calendar Children Circumcision Demographics Denominations Economics Education Exorcism Feminism Festivals Finance LGBT Madrasa Moral teachings Mosque Mysticism Philosophy Poetry Politics Proselytizing Science Slavery Social welfare Women Related topics Apostasy Criticism Muhammad Quran Hadith Other religions Islamism Violence terrorism war Islamophobia Jihad Jihadism Laws of war Glossary  Islam portal v t e Part of a series on Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Christian — Biblical texts — Book of Revelation Book of Daniel Olivet Discourse Sheep and Goats — Major figures — Jesus Two witnesses Four Horsemen Antichrist — Different views — Preterism Idealism Historicism Futurism — Millennialism — Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism — Other events — Events of Revelation Rapture Armageddon Seven Seals Second Coming Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Shiva Islamic — Figures — Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Isa Israfil Mahdi Dajjal Muhammad Al-Qa'im Sufyani Yajuj and Majuj — Events — Swallowing in Bayda Coming of the Mahdi Return of Isa Resurrection Jewish Messianism Book of Daniel Kabbalah Norse — Figures and items — Bound monster Gjallarhorn Líf and Lífþrasir Naglfar — Events — Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Vígríðr Taoist Li Hong Zoroastrian Frashokereti Saoshyant Inter-religious End times 2012 phenomenon Apocalypticism Millenarianism Last Judgment Resurrection of the dead Gog and Magog Messianic Age v t e The Mahdi (Arabic: ????????????, romanized: al-mahdiyy), meaning "the rightly guided one", is an eschatological Messianic figure who, according to Islamic belief, will appear at the end of times to rid the world of evil and injustice. In Islam, it is said that he will appear alongside Isa and establish the Divine kingdom of Allah.[1] There is no direct reference to the Mahdi in the Quran,[2] only in the hadith (the reports and traditions of Muhammad's teachings collected after his death). In most traditions, the Mahdi will arrive with 'Isa (Isa) to defeat Al-Masih ad-Dajjal ("the false Messiah").[3] Several canonical compilations of Hadith do include traditions concerning the Mahdi, although such traditions are notably absent from the two most-revered Sunni compilations, those of Bukhari and Muslim. Many orthodox Sunni theologians accordingly question Mahdist beliefs, but such beliefs form a necessary part of Muslim doctrine.[4] Although the concept of a Mahdi is not an essential doctrine in Islam, it is popular among Muslims.[5] It has been a part of the creed (aqida) of Muslims for 1400 years. Both Sunnis and Shia agree that the Mahdi will rule over the whole world and establish justice; however, they differ extensively on his attributes and status. Shi'ites have alternate views on which descendant of the Islamic Nabi (Prophet) Muhammad is the Mahdi. Twelvers, who form the majority of Shi'ites today, believe that Muhammad al-Mahdi, who is the son of the 11th Imam Al-Hasan al-Askari, is in occultation and is the awaited Mahdi. Tayyibi Isma'ili Shi'ites, including the Dawoodi Bohrah, believe that an Imam from the progeny of At-Tayyib Abu'l-Qasim is the current hidden Imam and Mahdi. The Bahá?í Faith believes that the Báb was the Mahdi, the spiritual return of the twelfth Shia Imam.[6][7] Contents 1 Historical development 2 Signs of the Appearance of Mahdi 2.1 Shia signs 2.2 Signs which both Sunni and Shia agree 3 Sunni Islam 3.1 References interpreted in ahadith 3.2 Historical views 3.3 Modern views 4 Shia Islam 4.1 Zaidiyyah and Isma'ilism 4.2 Twelver 4.2.1 Ahadith 4.2.2 The events of the uprising of Mahdi 4.2.3 The World before the advent of Mahdi 4.2.4 The world after the advent of Mahdi 5 Mahdist groups 5.1 Ahmadiyya 5.2 Nation of Islam 6 Persons claiming to be the Mahdi 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 9.1 Historical sources 9.2 Modern sources 10 External links Historical development The term Mahdi does not occur in the Quran. It is derived from the Arabic root h-d-y (?-?-?), commonly used to mean "divine guidance". The term al-Mahdi was employed from the beginning of Islam, but only as an honorific epithet and without any messianic significance.[2] As an honorific it has been used in some instances to describe Muhammad (by Hassan ibn Thabit), as well as Abraham, al-Husayn, and various Umayyad rulers (hud?t mahd?y?n).[2] During the second civil war (680–692), after the death of Mu?awiya, the term acquired a new meaning of a ruler who would restore Islam to its perfect form and restore justice after oppression.[2] In Kufa during the rebellion in 680s, Al-Mukhtar proclaimed Muhammad al-Hanafiyyah as the Mahdi in this heightened sense. Among the Umayyads, caliph Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik encouraged the belief that he was the Mahdi, and other Umayyad rulers, like Umar II, have been addressed as such in the panegyrics of Jarir and al-Farazdaq.[2] Early discussions about the identity of al-Mahdi by religious scholars can be traced back to the time after the Second Fitna. These discussions developed in different directions and were influenced by traditions (hadiths) attributed to Muhammad. In Umayyad times, scholars and traditionists not only differed on which caliph or rebel leader should be designated as Mahdi, but also on whether the Mahdi is a messianic figure and if signs and predictions of his time have been satisfied.[2] By the time of the Abbasid Revolution in the year 750, Mahdi was already a known concept. Evidence shows that the first Abbasid caliph As-Saffah assumed the title of "the Mahdi" for himself.[2] In Shia Islam, it seems likely that the attribution of messianic qualities to the Mahdi originated from two of the groups supporting al-Hanafiyyah: southern Arabian settlers and local recent converts in Iraq. They became known as Kaysanites, and introduced what later became two key aspects of the Shia's concept of the Mahdi. The first was the notion of return of the dead, particularly of the Imams. The second was that after al-Hanafiyyah's death they believed he was, in fact, in hiding in the Razwa mountains near Medina. This later developed into the doctrine known as the occultation.[8] The Mahdi appeared in early Shi'ite narratives, spread widely among Shi'ite groups and became dissociated from its historical figure, Muhammad al-Hanafiyyah. During the 10th century, based on these earlier beliefs, the doctrine of Mahdism was extensively expanded by Al-Kulayni, Ibrahim al-Qummi and Ibn Babawayh.[9] In particular, in the early 10th century, the doctrine of the occultation, which declares that the Twelfth Imam did not die but was concealed by God from the eyes of men, was expounded. The Mahdi became synonymous with the "Hidden Imam" who was thought to be in occultation awaiting the time that God has ordered for his return. Muhammad said: “I swear by Him Who sent me with the truth as a bearer of glad tidings, the Qaim from my offspring will surely become concealed from public view on the basis of a covenant that has been entrusted to him from me,[10] This return is envisaged as occurring shortly before the final Day of judgment.[11] In fact, the concept of the "hidden Imam" was attributed to several Imams in turn.[12] Some historians suggest that the term itself was probably introduced into Islam by southern Arabian tribes who had settled in Syria in the mid-7th century. They believed that the Mahdi would lead them back to their homeland and reestablish the Himyarite kingdom. They also believed that he would eventually conquer Constantinople.[8] It has also been suggested that the concept of the Mahdi may have been derived from messianic Judeo-Christian beliefs.[9][13] Accordingly, traditions were introduced to support certain political interests, especially Anti-Abbassid sentiments.[13][14] These traditions about the Mahdi appeared only at later times in hadith collections such as Jami' at-Tirmidhi and Sunan Abi Dawud, but are absent from the early works of Bukhari and Muslim.[15] Signs of the Appearance of Mahdi Main article: Signs of the appearance of Mahdi The Twelver Shia believe that the arrival of the Mahdi will be signaled by the following portents:[11] Shia signs The rise of Yamani, who is believed to preach support for Mahdi. The Scream of supernatural origin, coming from the sky calling man to defend Mahdi. The murder of Nafs al-Zakiyyah The vast majority of people who profess to be Muslim will be so only in name despite their practice of Islamic rites, and it will be they who will make war with the Mahdi. Before his coming will come the red death and the white death, killing two thirds of the world's population. The red death signifies violence and the white death is plague.[16] One third of the world's population will die from the red death and the other third from the white death. Several figures will appear: the Al-Harth, Al-Mansur, Shuaib bin Saleh and the Sufyani. There will be a great conflict in the land of Syria, until it is destroyed. Death and fear will afflict the people of Baghdad and Iraq. A fire will appear in the sky and a redness will cover them. Signs which both Sunni and Shia agree The coming of Sufyani, the enemy of the Mahdi who would raise an army against him. However, Majority of Muslims scholars consider the Hadith about Sufyani unreliable and weak (da‘eef).[17] The swallowing of an army composed of the Mahdi's enemies in Bayda which is located between Mecca and Medina. That he would rule for either seven, nine, or nineteen years. That it would be accompanied by raising the Black Standard flag in Khorasan. Sunni Islam Since Sunni Muslims has no established doctrine of Mahdi, compositions of Mahdi varies among Sunni scholars.,[18] others like Ibn Kathir elaborated a whole apocalyptic scenario which included prophecies about Mahdi, Jesus and Dajjal during the endtime.[19] Some Sunni beliefs deny the Mahdi as a separate figure, accordingly Jesus will fulfill this role and judge over mankind, thus Mahdi is considered as a title for Jesus, when he returns.[20] However the more common opinion among Sunni Muslims is, that the Mahdi is an expected ruler sent by God before the endtime to reestablish righteousness,[8] coincides with the Second Coming of Jesus Christ (Isa),[21][3] but, unlike most Shia traditions, Sunni Islam often do not believe the Mahdi has already been born.[22][23] Sunnis in general reject the Twelver Shi'ite principle of the Mahdi's occultation. Sunnis do, however, rely on traditionally canonical collections of narrations for derivations of the Mahdi's attributes and lineage. According to Sunan Abi Dawud, one of the six canonical books of Hadith in Sunni Islam, narrated by Umm Salamah, "The Prophet said: The Mahdi will be of my family, of the descendants of Fatimah."[24] In heavy contrast with Shia Islam, Sunnis have a much more human view of the Mahdi, who they believe will be nothing less than the most rightly guided Muslim of his time. He will be rectified in a single night (which is taken to mean that the provisions for his leadership and rule will be made in a single night). According to Sunan Ibn Majah, one of the six canonical collections of Hadith, narrated by 'Ali, "Mahdi is one of us, the people of the Household. Allah will rectify him in a single night."[25] According to Sunan Abi Dawud, "The Prophet said: The Mahdi will be of my stock, and will have a broad forehead [and] a prominent nose. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as it was filled with oppression and tyranny, and he will rule for seven years."[26][27] References interpreted in ahadith This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The Mahdi is frequently mentioned in Sunni hadith as establishing the caliphate. The following Sunni hadith make references to the Mahdi: Muhammad is quoted as saying about the Mahdi: His name will be like my name, and his father's name will be like my father's name[8] Even if the entire duration of the world's existence has already been exhausted and only one day is left before Doomsday, Allah will expand that day to such length of time as to accommodate the Caliphate of a person from my Ahlul-Bayt who will be called by my name. He will fill out the earth with peace and justice as it will have been full of injustice and tyranny (by then).[28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36] Umm Salama, a wife of Muhammad, is quoted as saying that; His [the Mahdi's] aim is to establish a moral system from which all superstitious faiths have been eliminated. In the same way that students enter Islam, so unbelievers will come to believe.[37] When the Mahdi appears, Allah will cause such power of vision and hearing to be manifested in believers that the Mahdi will call to the whole world from where he is, with no postman involved, and they will hear and even see him.[38] Historical views Sunni poets Jarir ibn Atiyah and Al-Farazdaq considered various Umayyads Caliphs, such as Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik, Umar II, Yazid II, and Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik to be the Mahdis. In Medina, among Sunni religious circles, the belief in Umar II being the Mahdi, "the just restorer of religion", was widespread. Said ibn al-Musayyib is said to identify Umar II as the Mahdi long before his reign. The Basran, Abu Qilabah, supported the view that Umar II was the Mahdi. Hasan al-Basri opposed the concept of a Muslim Messiah but believed that if there was the Mahdi, it was Umar II.[39] After the Umayyads, Sunnis held numerous Abbasid Caliphs to be the Mahdis.[40] Modern views A typical modernist in his views on the Mahdi, Abul Ala Maududi (1903–1979), the Pakistani Islamic revivalist, stated that the Mahdi will be a modern Islamic reformer/statesman, who will unite the Ummah and revolutionise the world according to the ideology of Islam, but will never claim to be the Mahdi, instead receiving posthumous recognition as such.[41] Some Islamic scholars reject Mahdi doctrine, including Allama Tamanna Imadi (1888–1972),[42] Allama Habibur Rahman Kandhalvi,[43] and Javed Ahmad Ghamidi.[44][45] Javed Ahmad Ghamidi writes in his book Mizan: Besides these, the coming of the Mahdi and that of Jesus from the heavens are also regarded as signs of the Day of Judgment. I have not mentioned them. The reason is that the narratives of the coming of the Mahdi do not conform to the standards of hadith criticism set forth by the muhaddithun. Some of them are weak and some fabricated; no doubt, some narratives, which are acceptable with regard to their chain of narration, inform us of the coming of a generous caliph; (Muslim, No: 7318) however, if they are deeply deliberated upon, it becomes evident that the caliph they refer to is Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz who was the last caliph from a Sunni standpoint. This prediction of the Prophet has thus materialized in his personality, word for word. One need not wait for any other Mahdi now. Ahmed Hulusi interpreted the Mahdi as a part of the inner self. Therefore, the Mahdi awakes in a person to defeat the inner Dajjal. The Mahdi stands for attaining selflessness and realizing a person's own existence as a part of God.[46] Imam al Hadith Abu Hayyan Saeed told that Mahdi traditions are contradicted each other. [96]. Shia Islam The Egyptian capital city of Cairo in 2014, where At-Tayyib Abu'l-Qasim, son of Fatimid Caliph Al-Amir bi-Ahkami'l-Lah, was born. Pictured are the Sultan Hasan and Al-Rifa'i Mosques. Zaidiyyah and Isma'ilism The Zaidiyyah and Isma'ilism branches of Shia Islam do not believe that the Mahdi is the twelfth Imam. In Ism???l?sm a distinct concept of the Mahdi developed, with select Ism???l? Imams representing the concept of Mahdi or Al-Qa'im (person) at various times. For the Sevener Ism???l?, the Im?mate ended with Isma'il ibn Ja'far, whose son Muhammad ibn Ismail was the expected Mahdi that Ja'far al-Sadiq had preached about. However, at this point the Ism???l? Im?ms according to the Nizari and Musta'li found areas where they would be able to be safe from the recently founded Abbasid Caliphate, which had defeated and seized control from the Umayyads in 750 CE. During the period of Ja'far, the Abbasid Caliphate replaced the Umayyads and began to aggressively oppose belief in an Imamate. Due to strong suppression by the Abbasids, the seventh Ism???l? Imam, Muhammad ibn Ismail, went into a period of occultation. During this period his representative, the D???, maintained the community. The names of the eighth, ninth, and tenth Imams are considered by some traditions to be "hidden", known only by their nicknames due to threats from the Abbasids. The 11th Imam, Abdullah al-Mahdi Billah, founded the Fatimid Caliphate in 909 CE in Ifriqiya (which includes present Tunisia in North Africa), ending the first occultation. In Ism???l? eyes this act again united the Imamate and the Caliphate in one person. The Fatimids then extended up to the central Maghreb (now including Morocco, Algeria and Libya). They entered and conquered Egypt in 969 CE during the reign of the fourteenth Imam, al-Mu'izz li-Din Allah, and made Cairo their capital. After the eighteenth Imam, al-Mustansir Billah, the Nizari sect believed that his son Nizar was his successor, while another Ism???l? branch known as the Mustaali (from whom the Dawoodi Bohra would eventually form), supported his other son, al-Musta'li. The Fatimid dynasty continued with al-Musta'li as both Imam and Caliph, and that joint position held until the 20th Imam, Al-Amir bi-Ahkami'l-Lah (1132 CE). At the death of 20th Imam Amir, one branch of the Mustaali faith claimed that he had transferred the Imamate to his son At-Tayyib Abu'l-Qasim, who was then two years old. Tayyeb's claim to the imamate was endorsed by the Hurrah al-Malika ("the Noble Queen") Arwa al-Sulayhi, the Queen of Yemen, who created the office of the Dai al-Mutlaq to administer the community in the Imam's absence. Zoeb bin Moosa (d.546 AH/1151 CE) was the first Dai-ul-Mutlaq, and lived and died in Haus, Yemen.[47] Tayyibis (which include the Dawoodi Bohra) believe the second and current period of occultation (satr) began after Imam Tayyeb went into seclusion and Imam from his progeny is very much present as Mahdi on earth every time. The Nizari Ismailis maintain that the Shi'a Ismaili Imams and Ismaili Muslim thinkers have explained that al-Mahdi is not a single person but actually a function undertaken by some of the hereditary Shi'a Ismaili Imams from the progeny of Muhammad and Imam 'Ali ibn Abi Talib. Throughout history, only a certain number of Imams have had the practical means to undertake such a grand mission of establishing justice and equity and removing oppression and injustice from the world because most of the Ismaili Imams have been heavily persecuted. For example, the founder of the Fatimid Caliphate, Imam 'Abdullah al-Mahdi, and the Fatimid-Imam Caliphs each performed the function or mission of the Mahdi. The Mahdi is therefore a mission carried out by several Shi'a Ismaili Imams and not a specific individual. Today, the 49th hereditary Ismaili Imam, Shah Karim al-Husayni Aga Khan IV, is undertaking the "Mahdi-ist" mission – the functions of the Mahdi – through the work of his institutions in the Aga Khan Development Network. Twelver Main article: Hujjat-Allah al-Mahdi The Mosque of Al-Askari in Samarra, Iraq, 2017. This is where Twelver Imams Ali al-Hadi and Al-Hasan al-Askari, the resting place of the father and grandfather of the Twelver Shia Mahdi. The Twelver branch Shia Muslims belief that the Mahdi is their twelfth and last in the chain of the Purified Imams. He was born on the 15th of Shaban 255 A.H. His name is Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Mahdi and titles are Hujjat, Qaim, Muntazar, Sahibuzzaman, and Khalaf al-Saleh, among others, the same names and agnomen of Muhammad. His birth was kept secret as the tyrant Abbasid ruler had planned to eliminate him, being aware of the fact that a person will be born in the family of the prophet who will appear to remove all types of corruption and tyranny. Except for the most trusted of the shias and his own family, no one knew of his existence. At the age of five, after the death of Hasan Askari the eleventh Imam, the responsibility of guiding the Shias (ie Imamat) was transferred upon him, in the same way as Prophet Yahya and Prophet Isa who were favoured by prophethood in their infancy.[48] Due to various efforts of the enemies to eliminate him, he was entrusted to occultation, which consist of two phases, one is short and the other is prolonged [49] According to Twelver Shias, the main goal of the Mahdi will be to establish an Islamic state and to apply Islamic laws that were revealed to Muhammad.[50] The Mahdi is believed to be the Twelfth Imam, Hujjat-Allah al-Mahdi.[51] They believe that the Twelfth Imam will return from the occultation as the Mahdi with "a company of his chosen ones," and his enemies will be led by the Dajjal and the Sufyani. The two armies will fight "one final apocalyptic battle" where the Shia Muslims believe that Mahdi and his forces will prevail over evil. Both the Shia and Sunni strongly believe that Isa (Jesus) will return after the Mahdi has arrived.[11][52] Jamkaran Mosque in Qom, Iran where Hassan ibn Muthlih Jamkarani is reported to have met the Twelver's 12th Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi. For Twelvers, the Mahdi was born but disappeared, and would remain hidden from humanity until he reappears to bring justice to the world, a doctrine known as the Occultation. For them, this Imam in occultation is Hujjat-Allah al-Mahdi, the Twelfth Imam. Shia Quran commentators such as Shaikh Tabarsi in his book Majma' al-Bayan have interpreted nine verses referring to the Mahdi in the Quran; and Muhammaed Hussain Tabatabai in book Tafsir al-Mizan have interpreted nine verses referring to the Mahdi in the Quran (eight of them are the same as those interpreted by Shaykh Tabarsi).[53][54] Twelver Shi'ites (as the main branch of Shia, which consists of 85% of all Shia Muslims)[55][56][57][58] claim that the Imam al-Mahdi, who went into occultation around 256/873-874, is the promised Mahdi, who will appear before the day of Judgement, to restore justice and equity on earth.[59] In Shia Islam, the Mahdi is associated with the belief in the occultation, that the Mahdi is a "hidden Imam" who has already been born and who will one day return alongside Jesus to fill the world with justice.[22] The promised Mahdi, who is usually mentioned in Shia Islam by his title of Imam-Al-Asr (the Imam of the "Period") and Sahib al-Zaman (the Lord of the Age), is the son of the eleventh Imam. His name is the same as that of the Prophet of Islam. According to Shia Islam, Mahdi was born in Samarra in 868 and until 872 when his father was martyred, lived under his father's care and tutelage. He was hidden from public view and only a few of the elite among the Shi'ah were able to meet him.[60] Belief in the messianic Imam is not merely a part of the Twelver creed, but the foundation.[59] Shias believe that after the martyrdom of his father he became Imam and by Divine Command went into occultation (ghaybat). Thereafter he appeared only to his deputies (na'ib) and even then only in exceptional circumstances.[60] In their perspective, the Mahdi appointed personal deputy Uthman ibn Sa'id 'Umari, one of the companions of his father and grandfather who was his confidant and trusted friend. Through his deputy Mahdi would answer the demands and questions of the Shias. After Uthman ibn Sa'id, his son Muhammad ibn Uthman Umari was appointed the deputy of him. After the death of Muhammad ibn Uthman, Abu'l Qasim Husayn ibn Ruh Nawbakhti was the special deputy, and after his death Ali ibn Muhammad Simmari was chosen for this task.[60] A few days before the death of Ali ibn Muhammad Sammari in 939 CE, an order was issued by the Mahdi, stating that in six days, Ali would die. Henceforth the special deputation of the Imam would come to an end and the major occultation (ghaybat-i kubra) would begin and would continue until the day God grants permission to the Imam to manifest himself.[60] In the Twelver view, the occultation of Mahdi is, therefore, divided into two parts: the first, the minor occultation (ghaybat-i sughra) which began in 872 and ended in 939, lasting about seventy years; the second, the major occultation which commenced in 939 and will continue as long as God wills it. In a hadith upon whose authenticity Shia and Sunni agree, Muhammad has said, "If there were to remain in the life of the world but one day, God would prolong that day until He sends in it a man from my community and my household. His name will be the same as my name. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as it was filled with oppression and tyranny."[60][61] Shia traditions also state that the Mahdi be "a young man of medium stature with a handsome face" and black hair and beard. "He will not come in an odd year [...] will appear in Mecca between the corner of the Kaaba and the station of Abraham and people will witness him there.[11] Ahadith This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Muhammad is reported in hadith to have said: The Mahdi is the protector of the knowledge, the heir to the knowledge of all the prophets, and is aware of all things.[62][63] People will flee from him [the Mahdi] as sheep flee from the shepherd. Later, people will begin to look for a purifier. But since they can find none to help them but him, they will begin to run to him.[64] When matters are entrusted to competent [the Mahdi], Almighty God will raise the lowest part of the world for him, and lower the highest places. So much that he will see the whole world as if in the palm of his hand. Which of you cannot see even a single hair in the palm of his hand?[65] In the time of the Mahdi, a Muslim in the East will be able to see his Muslim brother in the West, and he in the West will see him in the East.[66] Muhammad al-Baqir, the Fourth (Isma'ili) or Fifth (Twelver) Imam said of the Mahdi: The Master of the Command was named as the Mahdi because he will dig out the Torah and other heavenly books from the cave in Antioch. He will judge among the people of the Torah according to the Torah; among the people of the Gospel according to the Gospel; among the people of the Psalms in accordance with the Psalms; among the people of the Qur'an in accordance with the Qur'an. Ja'far al-Sadiq, the Sixth Imam, made the following prophecies: Abu Bashir says: When I asked Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, "O son of the Messenger of God! Who is the Mahdi (qa'im) of your clan (ahl al-bayt)?", he replied: "The Mahdi will conquer the world; at that time the world will be illuminated by the light of God, and everywhere in which those other than God are worshipped will become places where God is worshiped; and even if the polytheists do not wish it, the only faith on that day will be the religion of God.[67] Additionally, there are differences in hadiths regarding the day of the uprising of the Mahdi. Nawroz and Ashura both are considered to be specified for the day of the uprising. According to Ja'far al-Sadiq, the Mahdi will appear on a Friday. His father, Muhammad al-Baqir, also emphasized on the day of Ashura being the day of the uprising, and that his reappearance will be announced from the heavens, after which the Mahdi will lean against the wall of the Kaaba, and invite the people towards truth. Muhammad al-Baqir narrated that Mahdi would appear after the night prayers, and that he would possess a banner and shirt of Mohammed with him.[68] The events of the uprising of Mahdi According to Ja'far al-Sadiq, the sixth in the chain of the twelve imams of the Shia, Mahdi will appear on a Friday. Muhammad al-Baqir also emphasizes on the day of Ashura being the day of the uprising. His reappearance will be announced from the heavens.[68] Muhammad al-Baqir says regarding the reappearance of Mahdi, “The Mahdi (‘a) will rise up at a time when the helm of affairs would be in the hands of tyrants.” Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 77. [69] The World before the advent of Mahdi Muhammad al-Baqir said: Mahdi will not rise up except at a time full of fear and dread. Prophet Muhammad said, “After me the caliphate will rule; after the caliphs, the emirs will come, followed by kings, and after them tyrants and oppressors will rule, then the Mahdi will reappear.”[70][71][72] Religious Conditions Muhammad in one of his hadith, narrates the religious condition of Islam saying that it will be such that Muslims will be Muslims just for namesake, people will not recognize God and people will not know what is monotheism. Mosques will lose their importance. More attention will be given to the beautification of the structure devoid of the main aim of providing guidance and enlightenment. The plight of religion will be such that it will be sold at a miserable price. Believers in the morning will turn into infidels by evening. The rulings of the Quran will be denied.Muhammad said: “A period will come to pass for my ummah in which nothing will be left of Islam but its name, and there will be no trace of the Qur’an but its form and outline. The Muslims will be called Muslims in name but of all the people they will be the most alien to Islam.” The Ulama who are supposed to be the protectors of God's religion and the ones who guide the people will be ready to compromise with the tyrant kings and the self-centred rulers. Muhammad says in this regard,“The jurists (fuqaha) of those days will be the worst jurists under heaven. Sedition and chaos will start from them and will also return to them.”[73][74] Social conditions The social condition would be such that the powerful will oppress the weaker. People will be afflicted by immodesty and family insecurities. Even the most inhumane behavior will not be considered as indecent and gradually will become a normal act. Corruption and immorality will no longer be considered as indecent rather it would be counted as something natural and normal. It would be hard to find someone who would want to prevent it. People will be encouraged to have fewer children due to economic problems and lack of facilities. The number of women will exceed the number of men. The hadith of Muhammed says in this regard, "Men will die and women will remain." The aggressive and dominant powers of the world will cause insecurity to the weaker nations and their rights will be violated. Horrifying crimes such as executing young boys, burning children by dipping them into molten liquids, cutting human beings into pieces by axes and iron saws, molesting women, and killing the fetus by slitting their wombs, will be committed under the watchful eyes of the so-called superpower countries. The extent of the loss of Islamic values can be predicted by Muhammad's hadith, “The Day of Resurrection will not commence unless a woman would be openly taken away from her guardian in broad daylight and be molested in public in the middle of the road and no one would condemn and prevent this. The best among the people is he who will say: ‘I wish you would have gone a bit away from the middle of the road and done your work!’" On enquiring about the time of the reappearance of Mahdi, Muhammad al-Baqir replied, “It will be at the time when men would resemble women and women would act like men; at the time when men would suffice themselves with men (i.e. they would do sodomy), and so would women with other women (i.e. they would engage in lesbianism).”[75][76][77] Economic Conditions With frequent wars, corruption, and bad governance, the economic condition will globally decline. Scarce and untimely rains will affect agriculture. Fruits and crops will be destroyed. Water bodies may dry up leading to famine. Due to the lack of agricultural products, a recession in trade will prevail. Inflation will rise, leading to the inadequacy of income. The condition of poverty and starvation will be such that people will barter their daughters and wives in exchange for a small amount of food.[78] Insecurities People would wish for death upon seeing the brutality of each other. One of the companions of the prophet narrates a hadith in this regard “Verily, a time shall come upon you when man will wish for his death although he would not be under the pressure of poverty and indigence.” Slavery will prevail. Epidemics may occur frequently. Before the advent of Mahdi 'Red Death and White Death' may occur frequently. Red Death refers to war killings and White death means a plague. The whole of the world would be in despair and disappointment and people would not find any place to take refuge. A hadith of Muhammad al Baqir the fifth Imam of the Twelver Shias indicates the truth about the situation. “You will not see him while waiting for him except at the time when you become like a dead she-goat under the clutches of a fierce animal for which it makes no difference how she was brought. At that time there would be neither a place away from aggression where you could go nor a sanctuary where you could seek refuge".[79] War and Bloodshed Before the reappearance of the Mahdi, mass killings will increase and bloodshed and usurpation of the property will be regarded as lawful. The whole of the world will be afflicted by the war in such a way that while it subsides in a certain area, it will ablaze in another area. According to a hadith of Muhammad, no one would be free from the sedition of the end times. It would start from Syria turning towards Iraq spreading to the whole of the Arabian peninsula. A hadith from [Ali] adds in this regard, "Mahdi will not appear unless one-third of the people are killed; another one-third die, and the remaining one-third survive.” A number of people will die due to contagious diseases caused by chemicals and biological weapons used in the war.[80] The world after the advent of Mahdi When the Mahdi finally assumes control of the government, the world will for some time have been in a state of utter turmoil. Several Governments and political parties will have failed to provide peace, security, and economic improvement to the world.The Mahdi's government will be just in such a manner that the living will wish that their dead could come alive to live under a governance of such blessed peace and tranquility. Kufa will be the political capital of Mahdi. He will reside in Al-Sahlah Mosque where all the Prophets have visited in the past. All the believers will visit the city of Kufa. Muhammed al Fadil says in this regard, “The Day of Resurrection will not come to pass unless all the believers gather in Kufah.[81] Economic Condition The earth will unveil all its hidden treasures and they would be visible to all. The rivers will start flowing due to regular rainfalls, The famine situation will change and the vegetation will flourish. The farms will yield crops for starving people. Even the desert regions like Mecca and Madina will turn into vegetation and there will be palm-groves all over the area. Zakat and khums will be equally distributed amongst the people. In his governance, the rulers will be generous and will bestow the people with abundance. Prominent Shia scholar Mohammad Baqer Majlesi in his famous book Bihar al-Anwar interprets a hadith “Come and take those things for the sake of which you used to sever relationships, shed blood and commit sins. He will give wealth such that no one before him had ever done.[82] Science and Technology Mahdi will introduce new aspects of knowledge. It will reach its peak in the era of Mahdi. There will be advancements in the field of communications to such an extent that people will be able to find solutions on their palms. With regard to the development of transportation, Muhammad al-Baqir said: Mahdi will ride on the clouds with the help of thunder and lightning —?Muhammad al-Baqir This hadith interprets that there will be major advancements in the field of Transportation. Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: . Knowledge and learning are twenty-seven letters, and everything that the prophets have brought is only two letters; so, now, the people are unaware (of these letters) except (juz’an) these two. When our Qa’im rises up, he will bring out the other twenty-five letters, spreading and extending them among the people. He will also attach the two letters and a total of twenty-seven letters will be distributed among the people —?Imam as-Sadiq It can be deduced from this hadith that although mankind progresses in terms of knowledge and learning, in the period of Mahdi it will suddenly attain growth and expansion thirteen times more. [83] [84][85][64] Mahdist groups Ahmadiyya Main article: Ahmadiyya See also: Prophethood in Ahmadiyya Islam and Jesus in Ahmadiyya Islam In Ahmadiyya belief the terms "Messiah" and "Mahdi" are synonymous terms for one and the same person. According to Ahmadiyya thought the prophesied eschatological figures of Christianity and Islam, the Messiah and Mahdi, were in fact to be fulfilled in one person who was to represent all previous prophets.[86] The prophecies concerning the Mahdi or the Second Coming of Jesus are seen by Ahmadis as metaphorical and subject to interpretation. It is argued that one was to be born and rise within the dispensation of Muhammad, who by virtue of his similarity and affinity with Jesus, and the similarity in nature, temperament and disposition of the people of Jesus' time and the people of the time of the promised one (the Mahdi) is called by the same name.[87] These prophecies according to Ahmadi Muslims have been fulfilled in the person of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835–1908), the founder of the Ahmadiyya Movement, who claimed to be divinely appointed as the second coming of Jesus and the Mahdi in 1891 around the same point in time after Muhammad as Jesus had appeared after Moses (thirteen centuries). Contrary to mainstream Islam, the Ahmadis do not believe that Jesus is alive in heaven, but claim that he survived the crucifixion and migrated towards the east where he died a natural death and that Ghulam Ahmad was only the promised spiritual second coming and likeness of Jesus, the promised Messiah and Mahdi.[88][89] Nation of Islam Main articles: Nation of Islam and Wallace Fard Muhammad The Nation of Islam, founded by Wallace Fard Muhammad claimed that he was the Mahdi as well as Allah incarnate which is considered Shirk by majority of the Muslim sects. Point #12 of The Nation's "What the Muslims Want/What the Muslims Believe" says "We Believe that Allah (God) appeared in the Person of Master W. Fard Muhammad, July, 1930; the long-awaited “Messiah” of the Christians and the “Mahdi” of the Muslims." This is not recognized by other Muslims. Persons claiming to be the Mahdi Main article: List of Mahdi claimants Throughout history, various individuals have claimed to be or were proclaimed to be the Mahdi. These have included Muhammad Jaunpuri, founder of the Mahdavia sect; the Báb (Sayyid Ali Muhammad), founder of Bábism; Muhammad Ahmad, who established the Mahdist State in Sudan in the late 19th century; Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, founder of the Ahmadiyya movement; Massoud Rajavi, leader of the MEK;[90] Riaz Ahmed Gohar Shahi; and Wallace Fard Muhammad, founder of the Nation of Islam.[91] See also Islam portal Mahdism Last Roman Emperor Moshiach List of Islamic terms in Arabic Mahdaviat (disambiguation) Masih ad-Dajjal People claiming to be the Mahdi Parousia Sufyani Du'a al-Faraj References Constructs such as ibid., loc. cit. and idem are discouraged by Wikipedia's style guide for footnotes, as they are easily broken. Please improve this article by replacing them with named references (quick guide), or an abbreviated title. (January 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) ^ "Hadith – Chapters on Al-Fitan – Jami' at-Tirmidhi – Sunnah.com – Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (??? ???? ???? ? ???)". sunnah.com. Retrieved 3 March 2017. ^ a b c d e f g Madelung, Wilferd (1986). "al-Mahd?". Encyclopaedia of Islam. 5 (2nd ed.). Brill Academic Publishers. pp. 1230–8. ISBN 90-04-09419-9. ^ a b Sonn (2004) p. 209 ^ "mahdi | Definition, Islam, & Eschatology". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 31 January 2021. ^ Shahzad Bashir (2003). Messianic Hopes and Mystical Visions: The N?rbakhsh?ya Between Medieval and Modern Islam. University of South Carolina Press. ISBN 978-1-570-03495-4 page 24 ^ Effendi, Shoghi (1974). God Passes By. National Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of the United States. pp. 57–58. LCCN 44-51036. ^ Effendi, Shoghi (1932). The Dawn Breakers. Kingsport Press. pp. xxix–xxx. LCCN 32-8946. ^ a b c d Arjomand, Said Amir (December 2007). "Islam in Iran vi., the Concept of Mahdi in Sunni Islam". Encyclopaedia Iranica. XIV (Fasc. 2): 134–136. ^ a b Kohlberg, Etan (24 December 2009). "From Imamiyya to Ithna-ashariyya". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies. 39 (3): 521–534. doi:10.1017/S0041977X00050989. ^ Muhammad Zakariya, al-Sahih wa al-Mu’tabar min Akhbar al-Hujjah al-Muntazar (Majmu’at al-Rasid; 1st edition, 1434 H), p. 14, # 1 ^ a b c d Momen, Moojan (1985). An introduction to Shi?i Islam : the history and doctrines of Twelver Shi?ism. G. Ronald. pp. 75, 166–168. ISBN 9780853982005. ^ Henry, Corbin (1993). History of Islamic philosophy (Reprinted. ed.). Kegan Paul International. p. 68. ISBN 9780710304162. ^ a b Arjomand, Amir (2000). "Origins and Development of Apocalypticism and Messianism in Early Islam: 610-750 CE". Oslo: Congress of the International Committee of the Historical Sciences. Cite journal requires |journal= (help) ^ Reza, Saiyed Jafar (2012). The essence of Islam. Concept Pub. Co. p. 57. ISBN 9788180698323. ^ Glassé, Cyril, ed. (2001). "Mahdi". The new encyclopedia of Islam. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira (Rowman & Littlefield). p. 280. ISBN 0-7591-0190-6. ^ "The Signs of the Reappearance of the Twelfth Imam (ajtf)". Al-Islam.org. 6 December 2012. ^ "As-Sufyaani – da'eef by Dr at-Tareefi, Shaykh Hammood at-Tuwaijri, Shaykh Ibn 'Uthaymeen, Dr Haatim al-'Awni.". How sound is the hadith of as-Sufyaani?. Muhammad Al-Munajjid. 2021. ^ Hong Beom Rhee Asian Millenarianism: An Interdisciplinary Study of the Taiping and Tonghak Rebellions in a Global Context Cambria Press 2006 ISBN 978-1-934-04342-4 page 230 ^ Oddbjørn Leirvik Images of Jesus Christ in Islam: 2nd Edition A&C Black ISBN 978-1-441-18160-2 page 41 ^ John L. Esposito Oxford Dictionary of Islam Oxford University Press ISBN 978-0-195-12559-7 page 75 ^ Abu 'Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma'il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah al-Bukhari al-Ju'fi, al-Jami' al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mus?afa Dib al-Bagha], vol. 3, p. 1272, # 3264 ^ a b "Comparison of Shias and Sunnis". Religionfacts.com. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 4 May 2011. ^ "The Birth of the Savior of the World". Al-Islam.org. 7 April 2015. Retrieved 13 August 2020. ^ "Hadith – The Promised Deliverer (Kitab Al-Mahdi) – Sunan Abi Dawud – Sunnah.com – Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (??? ???? ???? ? ???)". sunnah.com. ^ "Hadith – Book of Tribulations – Sunan Ibn Majah – Sunnah.com – Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (??? ???? ???? ? ???)". sunnah.com. ^ "Hadith – The Promised Deliverer (Kitab Al-Mahdi) – Sunan Abi Dawud – Sunnah.com – Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (??? ???? ???? ? ???)". sunnah.com. ^ "16. Issues Of The Ghaybah: Reason For The Disappearance". Al-Islam.org. 7 April 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2020. ^ Sahih al-Tirmidhi, v2, p86, v9, pp 74–75 ^ Sunan Abu Dawood, v2, p7 ^ Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal v1, pp 84,376; V3, p63 ^ Al-Mustadrak alaa al-Sahihainby al-Hakim, v4, p557 ^ Al-Jaami' al-Saghîr, by Al-Suyuti, pp 2,160 ^ al-Urful Wardi, by Al-Suyuti, p2 ^ Kanz al-Ummal, v7 P186 ^ Sharh al-Mawahib al-Ladunniyyah, by al-Zurqani, v5, p348 ^ Fat'h al-Mugheeth, by Al-Sakhawi, v3, p41 ^ (Vizier Mustafa, Emergence of Islam, p. 171 ^ Muntakab al Adhhar, p. 483 ^ Jan Olaf Blichfeldt (1985). Early Mahdism: Politics and Religion in the Formative Period of Islam. p. 1231 ^ Ibid., 1233 ^ Syed Maududi, Tajdeed-o-Ahyaa-e-Deen, Islamic Publications Limited, Lahore, Pakistan, Chapeter: Imam Mehdi ^ Allama Tamanna Imadi, Intizar-e-Mehdi-o-Maseeh, Al-Rahman Publishing Trust, Karachi, Pakistan ^ Allama Habib-ur-Rahman Kandhlwi, Mehdaviyyat nay Islam ko Kiya Diya, Anjuman Uswa-e-Hasna, Karachi, Pakistan ^ "Al-Mawrid". Al-Mawrid. 25 September 2009. Archived from the original on 29 February 2012. Retrieved 29 April 2012. ^ Allama Iqbal, Iqbal Nama, Volume 2, Bazm-e-Iqbal, Lahore, Pakistan, Letter No. 87 ^ Ahmed Hulusi The Observing One Softcover ISBN 978-0-615-63664-1 page 48-49 ^ Daftary, Farhad (1990). The Ism???l?s: Their history and doctrines. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. p. 104. ISBN 0-521-42974-9. ^ Quran: Sura Maryam, Ayat 12 and 30. ^ Al Kafi Vol. 1 Pg.340; Ghaibat Nomani Pg. 180. ^ Nasr, Sayyed Hossein. "Expectation of the Millennium : Shiìsm in History," State University of New York Press, 1989, p. 19, ISBN 978-0-88706-843-0 ^ "mahd?." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. ^ "Chapter 4". Al-Islam.org. 21 May 2018. ^ "Mahdi in the Quran According to Shi'ite Quran Commentators". Al-Islam.org. 30 September 2015. ^ "Chapter 3: Mahdi in classical and modern". Al-Islam.org. 30 September 2015. ^ "Shia Islam's Holiest Sites". WorldAtlas. 25 April 2017. ^ "World Population Clock: 7.5 Billion People (2017) – Worldometers". www.worldometers.info. ^ Atlas of the Middle East (Second ed.). Washington D.C: National Geographic 2008 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFAtlas_of_the_Middle_East_(Second_ed.)._Washington_D.C:_National_Geographic2008 (help) ^ The World Factbook 2010 & Retrieved 2010-08-25. harvnb error: no target: CITEREFThe_World_Factbook_2010Retrieved_2010-08-25. (help) ^ a b Sachedina, Abdulaziz (1978). "A Treatise on the Occultation of the Twelfth Im?mite Imam". Studia Islamica. 105 (48): 109–124. doi:10.2307/1595355. JSTOR 4099480. – via JSTOR (subscription required) ^ a b c d e Tabatabai, Sayyid Muhammad Hossein (1975). Shi'ite Islam (PDF) (First ed.). State University of New York Press. pp. 210–211 (185–186 in the ebook). ISBN 0-87395-272-3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2014. ^ Ibn Masud, Abdallah. al Fusul al Muhimmah. p. 271. ^ Bihar al-Anwar: 95: 378; 102: 67, 117 ^ Mikyaal al-Makaarem: 1: 49 ^ a b Bihar al-Anwar: 52: 326 ^ Bihar al-Anwar: 5: 328 ^ Bihar al-Anwar: 52: 391 ^ Bihar al-Anwar: 51: 146 ^ a b "The Uprising of the Imam of the Time ('atfs)". Al-Islam.org. 12 September 2012. ^ "The Despotism of Governments". An overview of the Mahdis Government. 12 September 2012. ^ Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 22, p. 375; Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 221; Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 5, p. 456; Kashf al-Ghumah, vol. 3, p. 264; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 596. ^ Najmuddin Tabasi. "The uprising of the Imam". An Overview of Mahdis Government. ^ Sayyid Sa'eed Akhtar Rizvi. "Some signs of the day of Resurrection". Day of Judgement. ^ Thawab al-A'mal, p. 301; Jami' al-Akhbar, p. 129; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 190. ^ "Religious Conditions". An overview of the Mahdis Government. ^ Kamaluddin, vol. 1, p. 331. ^ 'Iqd ad-Darar, p. 333; Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 495. ^ "Social Conditions". An overview of the Mahdis Government. ^ "Economic Conditions". An overview of the Mahdis Government. ^ "Security before the advent". An overview of the Mahdis Government. ^ "Wars, killings and seditions". An overview of the Mahdis Government. ^ "The government of truth". An overview of the Mahdis Government. ^ "Harmony with nature". The golden era of reappearance. Associaiton of Imam Mahdi. 25 November 2014. ^ Mohammed Ali Shomali. "Science and Technology". The Globe before and after the advent of Imam Mahdi-Part 2. ^ Khara’ij: 2: 841 ^ Mukhtasar Basa’ir ad-Darajat: 117 ^ "The Holy Quran". Alislam.org. Retrieved 9 November 2012. ^ Friedmann, Yohanan (2003). Prophecy Continuous: Aspects of Ahmadi Religious Thought and its Medieval Background. Oxford University Press. p. 121. ^ "Jesus: A humble prophet of God". Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. Retrieved 30 April 2014. ^ Robinson, Francis. "Prophets without honour? Ahmad and the Ahmadiyya". History Today 40 (June): 46. ^ Merat, Arron (9 November 2018). "Terrorists, cultists – or champions of Iranian democracy? The wild wild story of the MEK". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 10 November 2018. ^ "The Muslim Program". Nation of Islam. 8 October 2013. Further reading Historical sources "Muqaddimah Ibn al-Salah", Sahih al-Bukhari, Dar al-Ma'aarif, pp. 160–169 Ja'far al-Sadiq, Al-Ghaybah (The occultation): narrations from the prophecies of al-Mahdi by Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, Mihrab Publishers Bihar al-Anwar Modern sources Baqar al-Majlisi, Muhammad, ed. (2003), Kitab al-Ghaybat, Qom: Ansariyan Publications Doi, A. R. I. (1971) [1971-1972], "The Yoruba Mahd?", Journal of Religion in Africa, 4 (2): 119–136, doi:10.1163/157006671x00070, JSTOR 1594738 Martin, Richard C., ed. (2004), "Mahdi", Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim world, Thompson Gale Momen, Moojan (1985), An introduction to Shi'i Islam, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, ISBN 0-300-03531-4 Shauhat Ali, Millenarian and Messianic Tendencies in Islamic Thought (Lahore: Publishers United, 1993) Timothy Furnish, Holiest Wars: Islamic Mahdis, Jihad and Osama Bin Laden (Westport: Praeger, 2005) ISBN 0-275-98383-8 Abdulaziz Abdulhussein Sachedina, Islamic Messianism: The Idea of the Mahdi in Twelver Shi'ism (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1981) ISBN 0-87395-458-0 Syaikh Hisyam Kabbani, The Approach of Armageddon (Islamic Supreme Council of America, 2002) ISBN 1-930409-20-6 "Mahd?", Encyclopædia Britannica, 2008, retrieved 4 July 2010 The Golden Era of Reappearance (PDF). www.almuntazar.in. Retrieved 14 July 2020. by Association of Imam Mahdi Mhammed Baqar Faqeeh Imani,Fauze Akbar, ed (1387 A.H), published Ansarul Mahdi, ISBN 964-7941-15-3 Ash Sheikh Ali Al Koorani, Moajam Al Ahadees al Imam Mehdi, ed (1411 A.H) External links Wikiquote has quotations related to: Mahdi Look up mahdi in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article "Mahdi". Signs of the Followers of Mahdi (Sunni Islamic View) Ismaili Gnosis "Imam Husain (a.s.) and Imam Mahdi (a.s.)". www.almuntazar.in. Retrieved 14 July 2020. v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Doomsday Clock Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Relativistic kinetic kill vehicle Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Nuclear warfare Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence Existential risk from artificial intelligence AI takeover Technological singularity Transhumanism Year 2000 problem Year 2038 problem Year 10,000 problem Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Doomsday argument Self-Indication Assumption Doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust winter famine cobalt Societal collapse Collapsology World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Climate apocalypse Deforestation Desertification Extinction risk from global warming Tipping points in the climate system Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony Collapse Disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of Desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Dispensationalism Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Lake of fire Number of the Beast Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of Perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Post-tribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Revelation 12 sign prophecy World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films List of fictional doomsday devices Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) Other Encyclopedia of Islam Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mahdi&oldid=1056168737" Categories: Imams Islamic terminology Messianism Religious leadership roles Mahdism Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Harv and Sfn no-target errors Subscription required using via Pages containing links to subscription-only content Wikipedia semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2018 Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles lacking reliable references from November 2017 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with ibid from January 2021 Articles with GND identifiers Articles with TDV?A identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Languages Alemannisch ??????? Az?rbaycanca ????? Bosanski Català ?eština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français ??? Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano ????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Lietuvi? Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??????? Norsk bokmål ?????? Polski Português Român? ??????? Shqip Simple English Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska ????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 20 November 2021, at 05:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement