https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Sovereignty_Day National Sovereignty Day - Wikipedia National Sovereignty Day From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Public holiday of Argentina National Sovereignty Day Image of Juan Manuel de Rosas used during the 2010 celebration of the Day of National Sovereignty. Official name Día de la soberanía nacional Observed by Argentina Significance The day the Argentine Confederation fought against an Anglo-French navy in the Battle of Vuelta de Obligado, during the Anglo-French blockade of the Río de la Plata Date November 20 Frequency annual The National Sovereignty Day (Spanish: Día de la Soberanía Nacional) is a national public holiday of Argentina, celebrated during November 20.[1] It commemorates the Battle of Vuelta de Obligado, when a small Argentine army stood against an Anglo-French navy that broke into the Paraná River on November 20, 1845, against the will of the Argentine Confederation. Although the battle itself ended with an Argentine defeat, the losses of Britain and France in the whole military campaign were so high that both countries were forced to the bargaining table and signed a treaty with Juan Manuel de Rosas. The day was enacted as a national observance in 1974, following a request from the revisionist historian José María Rosa, and promoted into a national holiday in 2010. Contents 1 History 2 First celebration 3 References 3.1 Citations 3.2 Sources History[edit] José María Rosa was the first one to make reference to November 20 as the Argentine's National Sovereignty day. It was in 1950, during the second administration of Juan Domingo Perón.[2] The Peronist government did not endorse openly the historical revisionism of the history of Argentina (which sought to modify the mainstream perspectives over Juan Manuel de Rosas), but it allowed public manifestations of it. Perón himself admired Rosas and the battle of Vuelta de Obligado since his time in the military school,[3] but did not engage in the historiographical controversy during his presidency: he maintained that "I have enough problems with living people, to fight with dead people as well".[4] The Rosist revisionism was forbidden during the peronist proscription of the Revolución Libertadora.[2] The first official mention to the date was done by the governor of Buenos Aires province Carlos Aloé in 1953.[citation needed] In 1954 José María Rosa and Ernesto Palacio created the "Popular organization for the repatriation of the remains of General Rosas". Rosas died in 1877 in Southampton, and his body hadn't been returned to Argentina.[5] Law 20.769 was proposed to both repatriate the body of Rosas and create a Day of National Sovereignty by Senator Cornejo Linares. The proposal was approved on November 14, 1973 by the Senate. It was approved with amendments by the Chamber of Deputies, and returned to the Senate. The new version did not include the new observance but just the repatriation. As a result, deputy Gallo proposed a new law, law 20.770, specifically for the new observance. Both laws were approved on September 25 and 26, 1974. Law 20.770 was promulgated by executive power the following October 3.[citation needed] In 2010, year of the Argentina Bicentennial, president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, who openly supports the Argentine historical revisionism,[6] made a new proposal to increase the number of holidays in Argentina. One of the proposals was to turn the Day of National Sovereignty into a national holiday, instead of just an observance. The proposal was later promulgated by a Necessity and Urgency Decree on November 3.[citation needed] First celebration[edit] The new holiday was first celebrated in 2010 at Obligado, the site of the battle, in an act with the presence of the president, revisionist historian Pacho O'Donnell and other politicians. The celebration included the inauguration of a monument of the event, created by Rogelio Polesello.[7] The Radical Civic Union (UCR) was Rosist at its early times, and praised the ideas of the old federalists. The colours of the shield, red and white, reflect that affiliation: federalists wore red badges, and white is the colour of the White Party from Uruguay (the modern National Party), of Rosas' ally Manuel Oribe. The UCR distanced from those ideas in later years, embracing the anti-rosist historiography instead. For this reason, some people was surprised by the presence of Leopoldo Moreau, one of the leaders of the UCR, among the invited guests.[8] The new holiday did not generate any political controversy.[9] References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ "Feriados Nacionales – Ministerio del Interior y Transporte". 26 November 2020. ^ a b Hernández, pp. 28–29 ^ Galasso, pp. 63–64 ^ Spanish: Demasiado problema tengo con los vivos, para pelearme también con los muertos Cited by Hernández, p. 23 ^ Hernández, p. 45 ^ Hernández, p. 69 ^ Hernández, p. 39 ^ Hernández, pp. 21–22 ^ Hernández, p. 9 Sources[edit] Galasso, Norberto (2006). Perón: Formación, ascenso y caída (1893–1955). Buenos Aires: Colihue. ISBN 950-581-399-6. Hernández, Pablo José (2011). Cristina, los setenta y la Vuelta de Obligado. Buenos Aires: Ediciones Fabro. ISBN 978-987-1677-28-3. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Sovereignty_Day&oldid=1056187055" Categories: Juan Manuel de Rosas Public holidays in Argentina Remembrance days Sovereignty November observances Spring (season) events in Argentina Hidden categories: Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Infobox holiday fixed day All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Español Polski Edit links This page was last edited on 20 November 2021, at 08:16 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Sovereignty_Day National Sovereignty Day - Wikipedia National Sovereignty Day From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Public holiday of Argentina National Sovereignty Day Image of Juan Manuel de Rosas used during the 2010 celebration of the Day of National Sovereignty. Official name Día de la soberanía nacional Observed by Argentina Significance The day the Argentine Confederation fought against an Anglo-French navy in the Battle of Vuelta de Obligado, during the Anglo-French blockade of the Río de la Plata Date November 20 Frequency annual The National Sovereignty Day (Spanish: Día de la Soberanía Nacional) is a national public holiday of Argentina, celebrated during November 20.[1] It commemorates the Battle of Vuelta de Obligado, when a small Argentine army stood against an Anglo-French navy that broke into the Paraná River on November 20, 1845, against the will of the Argentine Confederation. Although the battle itself ended with an Argentine defeat, the losses of Britain and France in the whole military campaign were so high that both countries were forced to the bargaining table and signed a treaty with Juan Manuel de Rosas. The day was enacted as a national observance in 1974, following a request from the revisionist historian José María Rosa, and promoted into a national holiday in 2010. Contents 1 History 2 First celebration 3 References 3.1 Citations 3.2 Sources History[edit] José María Rosa was the first one to make reference to November 20 as the Argentine's National Sovereignty day. It was in 1950, during the second administration of Juan Domingo Perón.[2] The Peronist government did not endorse openly the historical revisionism of the history of Argentina (which sought to modify the mainstream perspectives over Juan Manuel de Rosas), but it allowed public manifestations of it. Perón himself admired Rosas and the battle of Vuelta de Obligado since his time in the military school,[3] but did not engage in the historiographical controversy during his presidency: he maintained that "I have enough problems with living people, to fight with dead people as well".[4] The Rosist revisionism was forbidden during the peronist proscription of the Revolución Libertadora.[2] The first official mention to the date was done by the governor of Buenos Aires province Carlos Aloé in 1953.[citation needed] In 1954 José María Rosa and Ernesto Palacio created the "Popular organization for the repatriation of the remains of General Rosas". Rosas died in 1877 in Southampton, and his body hadn't been returned to Argentina.[5] Law 20.769 was proposed to both repatriate the body of Rosas and create a Day of National Sovereignty by Senator Cornejo Linares. The proposal was approved on November 14, 1973 by the Senate. It was approved with amendments by the Chamber of Deputies, and returned to the Senate. The new version did not include the new observance but just the repatriation. As a result, deputy Gallo proposed a new law, law 20.770, specifically for the new observance. Both laws were approved on September 25 and 26, 1974. Law 20.770 was promulgated by executive power the following October 3.[citation needed] In 2010, year of the Argentina Bicentennial, president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, who openly supports the Argentine historical revisionism,[6] made a new proposal to increase the number of holidays in Argentina. One of the proposals was to turn the Day of National Sovereignty into a national holiday, instead of just an observance. The proposal was later promulgated by a Necessity and Urgency Decree on November 3.[citation needed] First celebration[edit] The new holiday was first celebrated in 2010 at Obligado, the site of the battle, in an act with the presence of the president, revisionist historian Pacho O'Donnell and other politicians. The celebration included the inauguration of a monument of the event, created by Rogelio Polesello.[7] The Radical Civic Union (UCR) was Rosist at its early times, and praised the ideas of the old federalists. The colours of the shield, red and white, reflect that affiliation: federalists wore red badges, and white is the colour of the White Party from Uruguay (the modern National Party), of Rosas' ally Manuel Oribe. The UCR distanced from those ideas in later years, embracing the anti-rosist historiography instead. For this reason, some people was surprised by the presence of Leopoldo Moreau, one of the leaders of the UCR, among the invited guests.[8] The new holiday did not generate any political controversy.[9] References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ "Feriados Nacionales – Ministerio del Interior y Transporte". 26 November 2020. ^ a b Hernández, pp. 28–29 ^ Galasso, pp. 63–64 ^ Spanish: Demasiado problema tengo con los vivos, para pelearme también con los muertos Cited by Hernández, p. 23 ^ Hernández, p. 45 ^ Hernández, p. 69 ^ Hernández, p. 39 ^ Hernández, pp. 21–22 ^ Hernández, p. 9 Sources[edit] Galasso, Norberto (2006). Perón: Formación, ascenso y caída (1893–1955). Buenos Aires: Colihue. ISBN 950-581-399-6. Hernández, Pablo José (2011). Cristina, los setenta y la Vuelta de Obligado. Buenos Aires: Ediciones Fabro. ISBN 978-987-1677-28-3. Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Sovereignty_Day&oldid=1056187055" Categories: Juan Manuel de Rosas Public holidays in Argentina Remembrance days Sovereignty November observances Spring (season) events in Argentina Hidden categories: Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Infobox holiday fixed day All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Español Polski Edit links This page was last edited on 20 November 2021, at 08:16 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement