https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Register_of_Historic_Places National Register of Historic Places - Wikipedia National Register of Historic Places From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Federal list of historic sites in the United States This article is about the U.S. Register. For the Canadian online database, see Canadian Register of Historic Places. National Register of Historic Places Agency overview Formed 1966; 55 years ago (1966) Jurisdiction United States Annual budget $16.8 million (2018) Agency executive Sherry A. Frear, Chief, National Register of Historic Places/National Historic Landmarks Program and Deputy Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places Parent department National Park Service Website www.nps.gov/subjects/nationalregister The National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) is the United States federal government's official list of districts, sites, buildings, structures and objects deemed worthy of preservation for their historical significance. A property listed in the National Register, or located within a National Register Historic District, may qualify for tax incentives derived from the total value of expenses incurred in preserving the property. The passage of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) in 1966 established the National Register and the process for adding properties to it. Of the more than one and a half million properties on the National Register, 95,000 are listed individually. The remainder are contributing resources within historic districts. For most of its history, the National Register has been administered by the National Park Service (NPS), an agency within the United States Department of the Interior. Its goals are to help property owners and interest groups, such as the National Trust for Historic Preservation, as well as to coordinate, identify and protect historic sites in the United States. While National Register listings are mostly symbolic, their recognition of significance provides some financial incentive to owners of listed properties. Protection of the property is not guaranteed. During the nomination process, the property is evaluated in terms of the four criteria for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places. The application of those criteria has been the subject of criticism by academics of history and preservation, as well as the public and politicians. Occasionally, historic sites outside the country proper, but associated with the United States (such as the American Legation in Tangier) are also listed. Properties can be nominated in a variety of forms, including individual properties, historic districts and multiple property submissions (MPS). The Register categorizes general listings into one of five types of properties: district, site, structure, building or object. National Register Historic Districts are defined geographical areas consisting of contributing and non-contributing properties. Some properties are added automatically to the National Register when they become administered by the National Park Service. These include National Historic Landmarks (NHL), National Historic Sites (NHS), National Historical Parks, National Military Parks, National Memorials and some National Monuments. (Federal properties can be proclaimed National Monuments under the Antiquities Act because of either their historical or natural significance. They are managed by multiple agencies. Only monuments that are historic in character and managed by the National Park Service are listed administratively in the National Register.) Contents 1 History 2 Nomination process 2.1 Criteria 2.2 Exclusions 2.3 Properties listed 2.4 Multiple property submission 3 Types of properties 4 Property owner incentives 5 Recent past 5.1 50-year rule 6 Limitations 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links History[edit] Main article: History of the National Register of Historic Places Old Slater Mill, a historic district in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, was the first property listed in the National Register, on November 13, 1966.[1] George B. Hartzog Jr., director of the National Park Service from January 8, 1964, until December 31, 1972[2] On October 15, 1966, the Historic Preservation Act created the National Register of Historic Places and the corresponding State Historic Preservation Offices (SHPO).[3] Initially, the National Register consisted of the National Historic Landmarks designated before the Register's creation, as well as any other historic sites in the National Park system.[4] Approval of the act, which was amended in 1980 and 1992, represented the first time the United States had a broad-based historic preservation policy.[3][5] The 1966 act required those agencies to work in conjunction with the SHPO and an independent federal agency, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP), to confront adverse effects of federal activities on historic preservation.[6] U.S. Secretary of the Interior (1977–1981) Cecil Andrus removed the National Register from the jurisdiction of the National Park Service in 1978 To administer the newly created National Register of Historic Places, the National Park Service of the U.S. Department of the Interior, with director George B. Hartzog Jr., established an administrative division named the Office of Archeology and Historic Preservation (OAHP).[6][7] Hartzog charged OAHP with creating the National Register program mandated by the 1966 law. Ernest Connally was the Office's first director. Within OAHP new divisions were created to deal with the National Register.[8] The division administered several existing programs, including the Historic Sites Survey and the Historic American Buildings Survey, as well as the new National Register and Historic Preservation Fund.[6] The first official Keeper of the Register was William J. Murtagh, an architectural historian.[4] During the Register's earliest years in the late 1960s and early 1970s, organization was lax and SHPOs were small, understaffed and underfunded.[7] However, funds were still being supplied for the Historic Preservation Fund to provide matching grants-in-aid to listed property owners, first for house museums and institutional buildings, but later for commercial structures as well.[6] A few years later in 1979, the NPS history programs affiliated with both the U.S. National Parks system and the National Register were categorized formally into two "Assistant Directorates". Established were the Assistant Directorate for Archeology and Historic Preservation and the Assistant Directorate for Park Historic Preservation.[8] From 1978 until 1981, the main agency for the National Register was the Heritage Conservation and Recreation Service (HCRS) of the United States Department of the Interior.[9] In February 1983, the two assistant directorates were merged to promote efficiency and recognize the interdependency of their programs. Jerry L. Rogers was selected to direct this newly merged associate directorate. He was described as a skilled administrator, who was sensitive to the need for the NPS to work with SHPOs, academia and local governments.[8] Although not described in detail in the 1966 act, SHPOs eventually became integral to the process of listing properties on the National Register. The 1980 amendments of the 1966 law further defined the responsibilities of SHPOs concerning the National Register.[9] Several 1992 amendments of the NHPA added a category to the National Register, known as Traditional Cultural Properties: those properties associated with Native American or Hawaiian groups.[5] The National Register of Historic Places has grown considerably from its legislative origins in 1966. In 1986, citizens and groups nominated 3,623 separate properties, sites and districts for inclusion on the National Register, a total of 75,000 separate properties.[9] Of the more than one and a half million properties on the National Register, 95,000 are listed individually. Others are listed as contributing members within historic districts.[6][10] Nomination process[edit] It is hereby declared to be the policy of the United States Government that special effort should be made to preserve the natural beauty of the countryside and public park and recreation lands, wildlife and waterfowl refuges, and historic sites.[11] —?(49 USC 303) Any individual can prepare a National Register nomination, although historians and historic preservation consultants often are employed for this work. The nomination consists of a standard registration form (NPS 10-900) and contains basic information about a property's physical appearance and the type of significance embodied in the building, structure, object, site, or district.[12][13] The State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) receives National Register nominations and provides feedback to the nominating individual or group. After preliminary review, the SHPO sends each nomination to the state's historic review commission, which then recommends whether the State Historic Preservation Officer should send the nomination to the Keeper of the National Register. For any non-Federally owned property, only the State Historic Preservation Officer may officially nominate a property for inclusion in the National Register. After the nomination is recommended for listing in the National Register by the SHPO, the nomination is sent to the National Park Service, which approves or denies the nomination. If approved, the property is entered officially by the Keeper of the National Register into the National Register of Historic Places.[12] Property owners are notified of the nomination during the review by the SHPO and state's historic review commission. If an owner objects to a nomination of private property, or in the case of a historic district, a majority of owners, then the property cannot be listed in the National Register of Historic Places.[12] Criteria[edit] S. R. Crown Hall is listed under criteria B and C for its association with architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and modernist design. For a property to be eligible for the National Register, it must meet at least one of the four National Register main criteria.[14] Information about architectural styles, association with various aspects of social history and commerce and ownership are all integral parts of the nomination. Each nomination contains a narrative section that provides a detailed physical description of the property and justifies why it is significant historically with regard either to local, state, or national history. The four National Register of Historic Places criteria are the following. Criterion A, "Event", the property must make a contribution to the major pattern of American history. Criterion B, "Person", is associated with significant people of the American past. Criterion C, "Design/Construction", concerns the distinctive characteristics of the building by its architecture and construction, including having great artistic value or being the work of a master. Criterion D, "Information potential", is satisfied if the property has yielded or may be likely to yield information important to prehistory or history.[12] The criteria are applied differently for different types of properties; for instance, maritime properties have application guidelines different from those of buildings.[14] Exclusions[edit] There are specific instances where properties usually do not merit listing in the National Register. As a general rule, cemeteries, birthplaces, graves of historical figures, properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, moved structures, reconstructed historic buildings, commemorative properties and properties that have achieved significance during the last fifty years are not qualified for listing on the Register.[12] There are, however, exceptions to all the preceding; mitigating circumstances allow properties classified in one of those groups to be included.[12] Properties listed[edit] See also: United States National Register of Historic Places listings and List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks by state A typical plaque found on properties listed in the National Register of Historic Places An alternate series of plaques. Buildings on the National Register are often listed in local historic societies as well. A listing on the National Register of Historic Places is governmental acknowledgment of a historic district, site, building, or property. However, the Register is mostly "an honorary status with some federal financial incentives."[15] The National Register of Historic Places automatically includes all National Historic Landmarks as well as all historic areas administered by the National Park Service.[3] Landmarks such as these include National Historic Sites (NHS), National Historical Parks, National Military Parks/Battlefields, National Memorials and some National Monuments. Occasionally, historic sites outside the country's borders, but associated with the United States, such as the American Legation in Tangier, also are listed.[16] Listing in the National Register does not restrict private property owners from the use of their property.[17] Some states and municipalities, however, may have laws that become effective when a property is listed in the National Register. If federal money or a federal permitting process is involved, Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 is invoked. Section 106 requires the federal agency involved to assess the effect of its actions on historic resources.[3] Statutorily, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) has the most significant role by Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act. The section requires that the director of any federal agency with direct or indirect jurisdiction of a project that may affect a property listed or determined eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places must first report to the Advisory Council. The director of said agency is required to "take into account the effect of the undertaking" on the National Register property, as well as to afford the ACHP a reasonable opportunity to comment.[18] While Section 106 does not mandate explicitly that any federal agency director accept the advice of the ACHP, their advice has a practical influence, especially given the statutory obligations of the NHPA that require federal agencies to "take into account the effect of the undertaking."[3][18] In cases where the ACHP determines federal action will have an "adverse effect" on historic properties, mitigation is sought. Typically, a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) is created by which the involved parties agree to a particular plan. Many states have laws similar to Section 106.[19] In contrast to conditions relating to a federally designated historic district, municipal ordinances governing local historic districts often restrict certain kinds of changes to properties. Thus, they may protect the property more than a National Register listing does.[20] The Department of Transportation Act, passed on October 15, 1966, the same day as the National Historic Preservation Act, included provisions that addressed historic preservation. The DOT Act is much more general than Section 106 NHPA in that it refers to properties other than those listed in the Register.[18] The more general language has allowed more properties and parklands to enjoy status as protected areas by this legislation, a policy developed early in its history. The United States Supreme Court ruled in the 1971 case Citizens to Preserve Overton Park v. Volpe that parklands could have the same protected status as "historic sites."[18] Pecos Pueblo is one of a number of NRHP sites administered by the National Park Service. The Illinois State Capitol is one of 44 U.S. state capitols listed on the NRHP. College Hill Historic District is an example of a National Historic Landmark District. The Robert C. Weaver Federal Building is an example of a modern building listed on the NRHP. The American Legation, Tangier is the only site on the NRHP in a foreign nation. Walden Pond is an example of a natural site listed on the NRHP. The USS Wisconsin (BB-64) is one of a number of ships listed on the NRHP. Multiple property submission[edit] Round Barns in Illinois Thematic Resources is a Multiple Property Submission that includes 18 structures throughout the state. A multiple property submission (MPS) is a thematic group listing of the National Register of Historic Places that consists of related properties that share a common theme and can be submitted as a group. Multiple property submissions must satisfy certain basic criteria for the group of properties to be included in the National Register. The process begins with the multiple property documentation form which acts as a cover document rather than the nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. The purpose of the documentation form is to establish the basis of eligibility for related properties. The information of the multiple property documentation form can be used to nominate and register related historic properties simultaneously, or to establish criteria for properties that may be nominated in the future. Thus, additions to an MPS can occur over time. The nomination of individual properties in an MPS is accomplished in the same manner as other nominations. The name of the "thematic group" denotes the historical theme of the properties. It is considered the "multiple property listing." Once an individual property or a group of properties is nominated and listed in the National Register, the multiple property documentation form, combined with the individual National Register of Historic Places nomination forms, constitute a multiple property submission.[21] Examples of MPS include the Lee County Multiple Property Submission, the Warehouses in Omaha, the Boundary Markers of the Original District of Columbia and the Illinois Carnegie Libraries. Before the term "Multiple Property Submission" was introduced in 1984, such listings were known as "Thematic Resources", such as the Operating Passenger Railroad Stations Thematic Resource, or "Multiple Resource Areas".[22] Types of properties[edit] See also: National Register of Historic Places property types and Historic districts in the United States Clockwise from top left: a building, a structure, an object and a site – all are examples of NRHP property types. Listed properties are generally in one of five broad categories, although there are special considerations for other types of properties that in any one, or into more specialized subcategories. The five general categories for National Register properties are: building, structure, site, district and object.[14] In addition, historic districts consist of contributing and non-contributing properties. Buildings, as defined by the National Register, are distinguished in the traditional sense. Examples include a house, barn, hotel, church, or similar construction. They are created primarily to shelter human activity. The term building, as in outbuilding, can be used to refer to historically and functionally related units, such as a courthouse and a jail or a barn and a house.[14] Structures differ from buildings in that they are functional constructions meant to be used for purposes other than sheltering human activity. Examples include an aircraft, a grain elevator, a gazebo and a bridge. Objects are usually artistic in nature, or small in scale compared to structures and buildings. Although objects may be movable, they are generally associated with a specific setting or environment. Examples of objects include monuments, sculptures and fountains. Sites are the locations of significant events, which can be prehistoric or historic in nature and represent activities or buildings (standing, ruined, or vanished). When sites are listed, it is the locations themselves that are of historical interest. They possess cultural or archaeological value regardless of the value of any structures that currently exist at the locations. Examples of types of sites include shipwrecks, battlefields, campsites, natural features and rock shelters.[14] Historic districts possess a concentration, association, or continuity of the other four types of properties. Objects, structures, buildings and sites in a historic district are united historically or aesthetically, either by choice or by the nature of their development.[14] There are several other different types of historic preservation associated with the properties of the National Register of Historic Places that cannot be classified as either simple buildings and historic districts. Through the National Park Service, the National Register of Historic Places publishes a series of bulletins designed to aid in evaluating and applying the criteria for evaluation of different types of properties.[14] Although the criteria are always the same, the manner they are applied may differ slightly, depending upon the type of property involved. The National Register bulletins describe the application of the criteria for aids to navigation, historic battlefields, archaeological sites, aviation properties, cemeteries and burial places, historic designed landscapes, mining sites, post offices, properties associated with significant persons, properties achieving significance within the last fifty years, rural historic landscapes, traditional cultural properties and vessels and shipwrecks.[14] Property owner incentives[edit] A National Register of Historic Places plaque at the Robert E. Howard Museum in Cross Plains, Texas Properties are not protected in any strict sense by the Federal listing. States and local zoning bodies may or may not choose to protect listed historic places. Indirect protection is possible, by state and local regulations on the development of National Register properties and by tax incentives.[23] Until 1976, federal tax incentives were virtually non-existent for buildings on the National Register. Before 1976 the federal tax code favored new construction rather than the reuse of existing, sometimes historical, structures.[6] In 1976, the tax code was altered to provide tax incentives that promote the preservation of income-producing historic properties. The National Park Service was given the responsibility to ensure that only rehabilitations that preserved the historic character of a building would qualify for federal tax incentives. A qualifying rehabilitation is one that the NPS deems consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation.[24] Properties and sites listed in the Register, as well as those located in and contributing to the period of significance of National Register Historic Districts, became eligible for the federal tax benefits.[6] Owners of income-producing properties listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or of properties that are contributing resources within a National Register Historic District may be eligible for a 20% investment tax credit for the rehabilitation of the historic structure. The rehabilitation may be of a commercial, industrial, or residential property, for rentals.[17] The tax incentives program is operated by the Federal Historic Preservation Tax Incentives program, which is managed jointly by the National Park Service, individual State Historic Preservation Offices and the Internal Revenue Service.[25] Aside from the 20% tax credit, the tax incentive program offers a 10% tax credit for rehabilitation to owners of non-historic, non-residential buildings constructed before 1936.[26] Some property owners may also qualify for grants, like the now-defunct Save America's Treasures grants, which apply specifically to properties entered in the Register with national significance or designated as National Historic Landmarks.[27][28] The NHPA did not distinguish between properties listed in the National Register of Historic Places and those designated as National Historic Landmarks concerning qualification for tax incentives or grants. This was deliberate, as the authors of the act had learned from experience that distinguishing between categories of significance for such incentives caused the lowest category to become expendable.[4] Essentially, this made the Landmarks a kind of "honor roll" of the most significant properties of the National Register of Historic Places.[4] Recent past[edit] The Portland Building was added to the NRHP only 29 years after its opening. 50-year rule[edit] In American historic preservation, the 50-year rule is the generally held belief that a property must be at least 50 years old to be listed in the National Register of Historic Places.[29] Actually, there is no hard rule. As stated by John H. Sprinkle, Jr., Deputy Director of the Federal Preservation Institute, "this 'rule' is only an exception to the criteria that shape listings within the National Register of Historic Places. Of the eight 'exceptions' [or criteria considerations], Consideration G, for properties that have achieved significance within the past fifty years, is probably the best-known, yet also misunderstood preservation principle in America."[29] Each year, a new group of resources crosses the 50-year threshold. The preservation of these "underage" resources has gained attention in recent years. Limitations[edit] The demolition of the Jobbers Canyon Historic District marked the largest National Register historic district lost to date.[30] As of 1999, there have been 982 properties removed from the Register, most often due to being destroyed.[31] Among the properties that were demolished or otherwise destroyed after their listing are the Jobbers Canyon Historic District in Omaha, Nebraska (listed in 1979, demolished in 1989),[32][33] Pan-Pacific Auditorium in Los Angeles, California (listed in 1978, destroyed in a fire in 1989),[34] Palace Amusements in Asbury Park, New Jersey (listed in 2000, demolished in 2004),[35] The Balinese Room in Galveston, Texas (listed in 1997, destroyed by Hurricane Ike in 2008),[36] seven of the nine buildings included in the University of Connecticut Historic District in Storrs, Connecticut (listed in 1989, demolished in 2017),[37] and the Terrell Jacobs Circus Winter Quarters in Peru, Indiana (listed in 2012, set to be demolished in 2021).[38] See also[edit] National Register of Historic Places portal Listed building, the UK equivalent National Heritage Area Register of Culturally Significant Property United States National Register of Historic Places listings List of National Historic Landmarks by state List of National Memorials of the United States List of threatened historic sites in the United States List of African-American historic places List of university and college buildings on the National Register of Historic Places List of jails and prisons on the National Register of Historic Places List of heritage registers worldwide References[edit] ^ "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. July 9, 2010. ^ "National Park Service Directors and Directorate", Historic Listing of National Park Service Officials, National Park Service. Retrieved March 22, 2007. ^ a b c d e National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, Public Law 102–575, National Register of Historic Places, Official site. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ a b c d Mackintosh, Barry. "The Historic Sites Survey and National Historic Landmarks Program: A History", (PDF), National Historic Landmarks Program, Official site. Retrieved March 23, 2007. ^ a b Ferguson, T. J. "Native Americans and the Practice of Archaeology" (JSTOR), Annual Review of Anthropology, Vol. 25. (1996), pp. 63–79. Retrieved March 23, 2007. ^ a b c d e f g Fisher, Charles E. (1998). "Promoting the Preservation of Historic Buildings: Historic Preservation Policy in the United States". APT Bulletin. 29 (3/4): 7–11. doi:10.2307/1504604. JSTOR 1504604. ^ a b Scarpino, Philip V. "Planning for Preservation: A Look at the Federal-State Historic Preservation Program, 1966–1986 (in The Intergovernmental Politics of Preservation)" (JSTOR), The Public Historian, Vol. 14, No. 2. (Spring, 1992), pp. 49–66. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ a b c Bearss, Edwin C. "The National Park Service and Its History Program: 1864–1986: An Overview (in The National Park Service and Historic Preservation)" (JSTOR), The Public Historian, Vol. 9, No. 2, The National Park Service and Historic Preservation. (Spring, 1987), pp. 10–18. Retrieved March 22, 2007. ^ a b c Hertfelder, Eric. "The National Park Service and Historic Preservation: Historic Preservation beyond Smokey the Bear (in Commentary: How Well Is the National Park Service Doing?)" (JSTOR), The Public Historian, Vol. 9, No. 2, The National Park Service and Historic Preservation. (Spring, 1987), pp. 135–142. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ "National Register Database and Research - National Register of Historic Places (U.S. National Park Service)". www.nps.gov. Retrieved March 2, 2021. ^ "Department of Transportation Act Archived February 9, 2007, at the Wayback Machine", (PDF), National Park Service, Official site. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ a b c d e f "Criteria Bulletin," National Register of Historic Places, Official site. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ "How to Complete the National Register Registration Form" (PDF). National Register Bulletin. United States Department of the Interior: National Park Service: Cultural Resources. 1997. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 2, 2020. Retrieved December 20, 2020. ^ a b c d e f g h "How to Apply the National Register Criteria for Evaluation Archived December 4, 2013, at the Wayback Machine," (PDF), National Register Bulletins, National Park Service. Retrieved March 22, 2007. ^ "Strengths of Local Listing". Working on the Past:In Local Historic Districts. National Park Service. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. ^ American Legation, NHL Database, National Historic Landmarks Program. Retrieved April 11, 2007. ^ a b "What are the results of a listing?". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. Archived from the original on February 15, 2008. Retrieved August 27, 2013. ^ a b c d Gray, Oscar S. "The Response of Federal Legislation to Historic Preservation" (JSTOR), Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 36, No. 3, Historic Preservation. (Summer, 1971), pp. 314–328. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ "Section 106 Summary Archived June 22, 2013, at the Wayback Machine", Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, Official site, April 26, 2002. ^ "Federal, State and Local Historic Districts, National Park Service. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ Lee, Antoinette J. and McClelland Linda F. "How to Complete the National Register Multiple Property Documentation Form, (PDF), National Register Bulletin, National Park Service. Retrieved March 22, 2007. ^ "National Register of Historic Places: Multiple Property Covers as of 06/01/2014". National Park Service. Retrieved September 16, 2014. ^ By contrast, the state of Colorado, for example, does not set any limits on owners of National Register properties. See "National and state registers", at Colorado Office of Archeology & Historic Preservation Archived September 7, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Rehabiliation Standards and Guidelines—Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service". NPS.gov Homepage (U.S. National Park Service). Retrieved November 16, 2017. ^ "Historic Preservation Tax Incentives", Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, Official site. Retrieved March 22, 2007. ^ About the Historic Preservation Tax Incentives, Federal Historic Preservation Tax Incentives, Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, Official site. Retrieved March 22, 2007. ^ "Save America's Treasures: FAQ" National Park Service. Retrieved March 23, 2007. ^ "Save America's Treasures". National Trust for Historic Preservation. Retrieved March 1, 2013. ^ a b Sprinkle, John H., Jr. (Spring 2007). ""Of Exceptional Importance": The Origins of the "Fifty-Year Rule" in Historic Preservation". The Public Historian. 29 (2): 81–103. doi:10.1525/tph.2007.29.2.81. JSTOR 10.1525/tph.2007.29.2.81. ^ Fallows, James. "Our Towns: How Danville Has Avoided Omaha's Mistake - The Atlantic". www.theatlantic.com. Retrieved May 31, 2021. ^ Church sues over historic site, Caren Burmeister, Jacksonville Times-Union, 3/23/99. Retrieved 7/8/11. ^ Gratz, R.B. (1996) Living City: How America's Cities Are Being Revitalized by Thinking Small in a Big Way. John Wiley and Sons. p. V. ^ National Trust for Historic Preservation and Zagars, J. (1997) Preservation Yellow Pages: The Complete Information Source for Homeowners, Communities, and Professionals. John Wiley and Sons. p.80. ^ "The L.A. architecture landmark — abandoned, trashed and left to burn". latimes.com. Retrieved May 25, 2019. ^ Mikle, Jean. "Asbury Park's Tillie is still safe". Springfield News-Leader. Retrieved October 1, 2017. ^ "Historic Galveston nightclub destroyed". ABC13 Houston. Retrieved July 29, 2019. ^ Blair, Russell. "UConn to Demolish Seven of Nine 'Faculty Row' Houses". courant.com. Retrieved October 1, 2017. ^ "Circus barns on National Register of Historic Places to be demolish". whas11.com. Retrieved April 6, 2021. Further reading[edit] "Title 36, U.S. Code of Federal Regulations". Archived from the original on March 2, 2007. "Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property; CHAPTER I--NATIONAL PARK SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR; PART 60--NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES". National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on March 2, 2007. Retrieved April 11, 2007. "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. Retrieved July 11, 2011. Shrimpton, Rebecca H., ed. (1997). "How to Apply the National Register Criteria for Evaluation". Washington, D.C.: National Park Service. Retrieved April 11, 2007. National Register Bulletin No. 15 Sprinkle, John H., Jr. (2014). Crafting Preservation Criteria. The National Register of Historic Places and American Historic Preservation. New York: Routledge. Wiley, John (1994). National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. ISBN 0-471-14403-7. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Register of Historic Places. www.nps.gov/subjects/nationalregister—National Register of Historic Places www.achp.gov—Advisory Council on Historic Preservation v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places Topics Architectural style categories Contributing property Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places Keeper of the Register National Park Service Property types Lists by state List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks by state: Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Lists by insular areas American Samoa Guam Minor Outlying Islands Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Lists by associated state Federated States of Micronesia Marshall Islands Palau Other areas District of Columbia Morocco Related National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 Historic Preservation Fund List of jails and prisons on the National Register of Historic Places University and college buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places  National Register of Historic Places portal Category Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) ISNI 1 VIAF 1 WorldCat National libraries Norway United States Israel Art research institutes Artist Names (Getty) Other Faceted Application of Subject Terminology Social Networks and Archival Context SUDOC (France) 1 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Register_of_Historic_Places&oldid=1055704959" Categories: National Register of Historic Places 1966 establishments in the United States Historic preservation Heritage registers in the United States Historic sites in the United States National Historic Landmarks of the United States National Park Service Hidden categories: Articles using NRISref without a reference number Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2018 Good articles Pages incorrectly using the Blockquote template Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NLI identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Articles with WORLDCATID identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? Asturianu Az?rbaycanca Bikol Central Boarisch Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara ????? Français Frysk ??? ??????? Ido Italiano ????? Latviešu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Polski Português ??????? Simple English Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 17 November 2021, at 09:45 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Register_of_Historic_Places National Register of Historic Places - Wikipedia National Register of Historic Places From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Federal list of historic sites in the United States This article is about the U.S. Register. For the Canadian online database, see Canadian Register of Historic Places. National Register of Historic Places Agency overview Formed 1966; 55 years ago (1966) Jurisdiction United States Annual budget $16.8 million (2018) Agency executive Sherry A. Frear, Chief, National Register of Historic Places/National Historic Landmarks Program and Deputy Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places Parent department National Park Service Website www.nps.gov/subjects/nationalregister The National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) is the United States federal government's official list of districts, sites, buildings, structures and objects deemed worthy of preservation for their historical significance. A property listed in the National Register, or located within a National Register Historic District, may qualify for tax incentives derived from the total value of expenses incurred in preserving the property. The passage of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) in 1966 established the National Register and the process for adding properties to it. Of the more than one and a half million properties on the National Register, 95,000 are listed individually. The remainder are contributing resources within historic districts. For most of its history, the National Register has been administered by the National Park Service (NPS), an agency within the United States Department of the Interior. Its goals are to help property owners and interest groups, such as the National Trust for Historic Preservation, as well as to coordinate, identify and protect historic sites in the United States. While National Register listings are mostly symbolic, their recognition of significance provides some financial incentive to owners of listed properties. Protection of the property is not guaranteed. During the nomination process, the property is evaluated in terms of the four criteria for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places. The application of those criteria has been the subject of criticism by academics of history and preservation, as well as the public and politicians. Occasionally, historic sites outside the country proper, but associated with the United States (such as the American Legation in Tangier) are also listed. Properties can be nominated in a variety of forms, including individual properties, historic districts and multiple property submissions (MPS). The Register categorizes general listings into one of five types of properties: district, site, structure, building or object. National Register Historic Districts are defined geographical areas consisting of contributing and non-contributing properties. Some properties are added automatically to the National Register when they become administered by the National Park Service. These include National Historic Landmarks (NHL), National Historic Sites (NHS), National Historical Parks, National Military Parks, National Memorials and some National Monuments. (Federal properties can be proclaimed National Monuments under the Antiquities Act because of either their historical or natural significance. They are managed by multiple agencies. Only monuments that are historic in character and managed by the National Park Service are listed administratively in the National Register.) Contents 1 History 2 Nomination process 2.1 Criteria 2.2 Exclusions 2.3 Properties listed 2.4 Multiple property submission 3 Types of properties 4 Property owner incentives 5 Recent past 5.1 50-year rule 6 Limitations 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links History[edit] Main article: History of the National Register of Historic Places Old Slater Mill, a historic district in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, was the first property listed in the National Register, on November 13, 1966.[1] George B. Hartzog Jr., director of the National Park Service from January 8, 1964, until December 31, 1972[2] On October 15, 1966, the Historic Preservation Act created the National Register of Historic Places and the corresponding State Historic Preservation Offices (SHPO).[3] Initially, the National Register consisted of the National Historic Landmarks designated before the Register's creation, as well as any other historic sites in the National Park system.[4] Approval of the act, which was amended in 1980 and 1992, represented the first time the United States had a broad-based historic preservation policy.[3][5] The 1966 act required those agencies to work in conjunction with the SHPO and an independent federal agency, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP), to confront adverse effects of federal activities on historic preservation.[6] U.S. Secretary of the Interior (1977–1981) Cecil Andrus removed the National Register from the jurisdiction of the National Park Service in 1978 To administer the newly created National Register of Historic Places, the National Park Service of the U.S. Department of the Interior, with director George B. Hartzog Jr., established an administrative division named the Office of Archeology and Historic Preservation (OAHP).[6][7] Hartzog charged OAHP with creating the National Register program mandated by the 1966 law. Ernest Connally was the Office's first director. Within OAHP new divisions were created to deal with the National Register.[8] The division administered several existing programs, including the Historic Sites Survey and the Historic American Buildings Survey, as well as the new National Register and Historic Preservation Fund.[6] The first official Keeper of the Register was William J. Murtagh, an architectural historian.[4] During the Register's earliest years in the late 1960s and early 1970s, organization was lax and SHPOs were small, understaffed and underfunded.[7] However, funds were still being supplied for the Historic Preservation Fund to provide matching grants-in-aid to listed property owners, first for house museums and institutional buildings, but later for commercial structures as well.[6] A few years later in 1979, the NPS history programs affiliated with both the U.S. National Parks system and the National Register were categorized formally into two "Assistant Directorates". Established were the Assistant Directorate for Archeology and Historic Preservation and the Assistant Directorate for Park Historic Preservation.[8] From 1978 until 1981, the main agency for the National Register was the Heritage Conservation and Recreation Service (HCRS) of the United States Department of the Interior.[9] In February 1983, the two assistant directorates were merged to promote efficiency and recognize the interdependency of their programs. Jerry L. Rogers was selected to direct this newly merged associate directorate. He was described as a skilled administrator, who was sensitive to the need for the NPS to work with SHPOs, academia and local governments.[8] Although not described in detail in the 1966 act, SHPOs eventually became integral to the process of listing properties on the National Register. The 1980 amendments of the 1966 law further defined the responsibilities of SHPOs concerning the National Register.[9] Several 1992 amendments of the NHPA added a category to the National Register, known as Traditional Cultural Properties: those properties associated with Native American or Hawaiian groups.[5] The National Register of Historic Places has grown considerably from its legislative origins in 1966. In 1986, citizens and groups nominated 3,623 separate properties, sites and districts for inclusion on the National Register, a total of 75,000 separate properties.[9] Of the more than one and a half million properties on the National Register, 95,000 are listed individually. Others are listed as contributing members within historic districts.[6][10] Nomination process[edit] It is hereby declared to be the policy of the United States Government that special effort should be made to preserve the natural beauty of the countryside and public park and recreation lands, wildlife and waterfowl refuges, and historic sites.[11] —?(49 USC 303) Any individual can prepare a National Register nomination, although historians and historic preservation consultants often are employed for this work. The nomination consists of a standard registration form (NPS 10-900) and contains basic information about a property's physical appearance and the type of significance embodied in the building, structure, object, site, or district.[12][13] The State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) receives National Register nominations and provides feedback to the nominating individual or group. After preliminary review, the SHPO sends each nomination to the state's historic review commission, which then recommends whether the State Historic Preservation Officer should send the nomination to the Keeper of the National Register. For any non-Federally owned property, only the State Historic Preservation Officer may officially nominate a property for inclusion in the National Register. After the nomination is recommended for listing in the National Register by the SHPO, the nomination is sent to the National Park Service, which approves or denies the nomination. If approved, the property is entered officially by the Keeper of the National Register into the National Register of Historic Places.[12] Property owners are notified of the nomination during the review by the SHPO and state's historic review commission. If an owner objects to a nomination of private property, or in the case of a historic district, a majority of owners, then the property cannot be listed in the National Register of Historic Places.[12] Criteria[edit] S. R. Crown Hall is listed under criteria B and C for its association with architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and modernist design. For a property to be eligible for the National Register, it must meet at least one of the four National Register main criteria.[14] Information about architectural styles, association with various aspects of social history and commerce and ownership are all integral parts of the nomination. Each nomination contains a narrative section that provides a detailed physical description of the property and justifies why it is significant historically with regard either to local, state, or national history. The four National Register of Historic Places criteria are the following. Criterion A, "Event", the property must make a contribution to the major pattern of American history. Criterion B, "Person", is associated with significant people of the American past. Criterion C, "Design/Construction", concerns the distinctive characteristics of the building by its architecture and construction, including having great artistic value or being the work of a master. Criterion D, "Information potential", is satisfied if the property has yielded or may be likely to yield information important to prehistory or history.[12] The criteria are applied differently for different types of properties; for instance, maritime properties have application guidelines different from those of buildings.[14] Exclusions[edit] There are specific instances where properties usually do not merit listing in the National Register. As a general rule, cemeteries, birthplaces, graves of historical figures, properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, moved structures, reconstructed historic buildings, commemorative properties and properties that have achieved significance during the last fifty years are not qualified for listing on the Register.[12] There are, however, exceptions to all the preceding; mitigating circumstances allow properties classified in one of those groups to be included.[12] Properties listed[edit] See also: United States National Register of Historic Places listings and List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks by state A typical plaque found on properties listed in the National Register of Historic Places An alternate series of plaques. Buildings on the National Register are often listed in local historic societies as well. A listing on the National Register of Historic Places is governmental acknowledgment of a historic district, site, building, or property. However, the Register is mostly "an honorary status with some federal financial incentives."[15] The National Register of Historic Places automatically includes all National Historic Landmarks as well as all historic areas administered by the National Park Service.[3] Landmarks such as these include National Historic Sites (NHS), National Historical Parks, National Military Parks/Battlefields, National Memorials and some National Monuments. Occasionally, historic sites outside the country's borders, but associated with the United States, such as the American Legation in Tangier, also are listed.[16] Listing in the National Register does not restrict private property owners from the use of their property.[17] Some states and municipalities, however, may have laws that become effective when a property is listed in the National Register. If federal money or a federal permitting process is involved, Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 is invoked. Section 106 requires the federal agency involved to assess the effect of its actions on historic resources.[3] Statutorily, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) has the most significant role by Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act. The section requires that the director of any federal agency with direct or indirect jurisdiction of a project that may affect a property listed or determined eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places must first report to the Advisory Council. The director of said agency is required to "take into account the effect of the undertaking" on the National Register property, as well as to afford the ACHP a reasonable opportunity to comment.[18] While Section 106 does not mandate explicitly that any federal agency director accept the advice of the ACHP, their advice has a practical influence, especially given the statutory obligations of the NHPA that require federal agencies to "take into account the effect of the undertaking."[3][18] In cases where the ACHP determines federal action will have an "adverse effect" on historic properties, mitigation is sought. Typically, a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) is created by which the involved parties agree to a particular plan. Many states have laws similar to Section 106.[19] In contrast to conditions relating to a federally designated historic district, municipal ordinances governing local historic districts often restrict certain kinds of changes to properties. Thus, they may protect the property more than a National Register listing does.[20] The Department of Transportation Act, passed on October 15, 1966, the same day as the National Historic Preservation Act, included provisions that addressed historic preservation. The DOT Act is much more general than Section 106 NHPA in that it refers to properties other than those listed in the Register.[18] The more general language has allowed more properties and parklands to enjoy status as protected areas by this legislation, a policy developed early in its history. The United States Supreme Court ruled in the 1971 case Citizens to Preserve Overton Park v. Volpe that parklands could have the same protected status as "historic sites."[18] Pecos Pueblo is one of a number of NRHP sites administered by the National Park Service. The Illinois State Capitol is one of 44 U.S. state capitols listed on the NRHP. College Hill Historic District is an example of a National Historic Landmark District. The Robert C. Weaver Federal Building is an example of a modern building listed on the NRHP. The American Legation, Tangier is the only site on the NRHP in a foreign nation. Walden Pond is an example of a natural site listed on the NRHP. The USS Wisconsin (BB-64) is one of a number of ships listed on the NRHP. Multiple property submission[edit] Round Barns in Illinois Thematic Resources is a Multiple Property Submission that includes 18 structures throughout the state. A multiple property submission (MPS) is a thematic group listing of the National Register of Historic Places that consists of related properties that share a common theme and can be submitted as a group. Multiple property submissions must satisfy certain basic criteria for the group of properties to be included in the National Register. The process begins with the multiple property documentation form which acts as a cover document rather than the nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. The purpose of the documentation form is to establish the basis of eligibility for related properties. The information of the multiple property documentation form can be used to nominate and register related historic properties simultaneously, or to establish criteria for properties that may be nominated in the future. Thus, additions to an MPS can occur over time. The nomination of individual properties in an MPS is accomplished in the same manner as other nominations. The name of the "thematic group" denotes the historical theme of the properties. It is considered the "multiple property listing." Once an individual property or a group of properties is nominated and listed in the National Register, the multiple property documentation form, combined with the individual National Register of Historic Places nomination forms, constitute a multiple property submission.[21] Examples of MPS include the Lee County Multiple Property Submission, the Warehouses in Omaha, the Boundary Markers of the Original District of Columbia and the Illinois Carnegie Libraries. Before the term "Multiple Property Submission" was introduced in 1984, such listings were known as "Thematic Resources", such as the Operating Passenger Railroad Stations Thematic Resource, or "Multiple Resource Areas".[22] Types of properties[edit] See also: National Register of Historic Places property types and Historic districts in the United States Clockwise from top left: a building, a structure, an object and a site – all are examples of NRHP property types. Listed properties are generally in one of five broad categories, although there are special considerations for other types of properties that in any one, or into more specialized subcategories. The five general categories for National Register properties are: building, structure, site, district and object.[14] In addition, historic districts consist of contributing and non-contributing properties. Buildings, as defined by the National Register, are distinguished in the traditional sense. Examples include a house, barn, hotel, church, or similar construction. They are created primarily to shelter human activity. The term building, as in outbuilding, can be used to refer to historically and functionally related units, such as a courthouse and a jail or a barn and a house.[14] Structures differ from buildings in that they are functional constructions meant to be used for purposes other than sheltering human activity. Examples include an aircraft, a grain elevator, a gazebo and a bridge. Objects are usually artistic in nature, or small in scale compared to structures and buildings. Although objects may be movable, they are generally associated with a specific setting or environment. Examples of objects include monuments, sculptures and fountains. Sites are the locations of significant events, which can be prehistoric or historic in nature and represent activities or buildings (standing, ruined, or vanished). When sites are listed, it is the locations themselves that are of historical interest. They possess cultural or archaeological value regardless of the value of any structures that currently exist at the locations. Examples of types of sites include shipwrecks, battlefields, campsites, natural features and rock shelters.[14] Historic districts possess a concentration, association, or continuity of the other four types of properties. Objects, structures, buildings and sites in a historic district are united historically or aesthetically, either by choice or by the nature of their development.[14] There are several other different types of historic preservation associated with the properties of the National Register of Historic Places that cannot be classified as either simple buildings and historic districts. Through the National Park Service, the National Register of Historic Places publishes a series of bulletins designed to aid in evaluating and applying the criteria for evaluation of different types of properties.[14] Although the criteria are always the same, the manner they are applied may differ slightly, depending upon the type of property involved. The National Register bulletins describe the application of the criteria for aids to navigation, historic battlefields, archaeological sites, aviation properties, cemeteries and burial places, historic designed landscapes, mining sites, post offices, properties associated with significant persons, properties achieving significance within the last fifty years, rural historic landscapes, traditional cultural properties and vessels and shipwrecks.[14] Property owner incentives[edit] A National Register of Historic Places plaque at the Robert E. Howard Museum in Cross Plains, Texas Properties are not protected in any strict sense by the Federal listing. States and local zoning bodies may or may not choose to protect listed historic places. Indirect protection is possible, by state and local regulations on the development of National Register properties and by tax incentives.[23] Until 1976, federal tax incentives were virtually non-existent for buildings on the National Register. Before 1976 the federal tax code favored new construction rather than the reuse of existing, sometimes historical, structures.[6] In 1976, the tax code was altered to provide tax incentives that promote the preservation of income-producing historic properties. The National Park Service was given the responsibility to ensure that only rehabilitations that preserved the historic character of a building would qualify for federal tax incentives. A qualifying rehabilitation is one that the NPS deems consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation.[24] Properties and sites listed in the Register, as well as those located in and contributing to the period of significance of National Register Historic Districts, became eligible for the federal tax benefits.[6] Owners of income-producing properties listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or of properties that are contributing resources within a National Register Historic District may be eligible for a 20% investment tax credit for the rehabilitation of the historic structure. The rehabilitation may be of a commercial, industrial, or residential property, for rentals.[17] The tax incentives program is operated by the Federal Historic Preservation Tax Incentives program, which is managed jointly by the National Park Service, individual State Historic Preservation Offices and the Internal Revenue Service.[25] Aside from the 20% tax credit, the tax incentive program offers a 10% tax credit for rehabilitation to owners of non-historic, non-residential buildings constructed before 1936.[26] Some property owners may also qualify for grants, like the now-defunct Save America's Treasures grants, which apply specifically to properties entered in the Register with national significance or designated as National Historic Landmarks.[27][28] The NHPA did not distinguish between properties listed in the National Register of Historic Places and those designated as National Historic Landmarks concerning qualification for tax incentives or grants. This was deliberate, as the authors of the act had learned from experience that distinguishing between categories of significance for such incentives caused the lowest category to become expendable.[4] Essentially, this made the Landmarks a kind of "honor roll" of the most significant properties of the National Register of Historic Places.[4] Recent past[edit] The Portland Building was added to the NRHP only 29 years after its opening. 50-year rule[edit] In American historic preservation, the 50-year rule is the generally held belief that a property must be at least 50 years old to be listed in the National Register of Historic Places.[29] Actually, there is no hard rule. As stated by John H. Sprinkle, Jr., Deputy Director of the Federal Preservation Institute, "this 'rule' is only an exception to the criteria that shape listings within the National Register of Historic Places. Of the eight 'exceptions' [or criteria considerations], Consideration G, for properties that have achieved significance within the past fifty years, is probably the best-known, yet also misunderstood preservation principle in America."[29] Each year, a new group of resources crosses the 50-year threshold. The preservation of these "underage" resources has gained attention in recent years. Limitations[edit] The demolition of the Jobbers Canyon Historic District marked the largest National Register historic district lost to date.[30] As of 1999, there have been 982 properties removed from the Register, most often due to being destroyed.[31] Among the properties that were demolished or otherwise destroyed after their listing are the Jobbers Canyon Historic District in Omaha, Nebraska (listed in 1979, demolished in 1989),[32][33] Pan-Pacific Auditorium in Los Angeles, California (listed in 1978, destroyed in a fire in 1989),[34] Palace Amusements in Asbury Park, New Jersey (listed in 2000, demolished in 2004),[35] The Balinese Room in Galveston, Texas (listed in 1997, destroyed by Hurricane Ike in 2008),[36] seven of the nine buildings included in the University of Connecticut Historic District in Storrs, Connecticut (listed in 1989, demolished in 2017),[37] and the Terrell Jacobs Circus Winter Quarters in Peru, Indiana (listed in 2012, set to be demolished in 2021).[38] See also[edit] National Register of Historic Places portal Listed building, the UK equivalent National Heritage Area Register of Culturally Significant Property United States National Register of Historic Places listings List of National Historic Landmarks by state List of National Memorials of the United States List of threatened historic sites in the United States List of African-American historic places List of university and college buildings on the National Register of Historic Places List of jails and prisons on the National Register of Historic Places List of heritage registers worldwide References[edit] ^ "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. July 9, 2010. ^ "National Park Service Directors and Directorate", Historic Listing of National Park Service Officials, National Park Service. Retrieved March 22, 2007. ^ a b c d e National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, Public Law 102–575, National Register of Historic Places, Official site. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ a b c d Mackintosh, Barry. "The Historic Sites Survey and National Historic Landmarks Program: A History", (PDF), National Historic Landmarks Program, Official site. Retrieved March 23, 2007. ^ a b Ferguson, T. J. "Native Americans and the Practice of Archaeology" (JSTOR), Annual Review of Anthropology, Vol. 25. (1996), pp. 63–79. Retrieved March 23, 2007. ^ a b c d e f g Fisher, Charles E. (1998). "Promoting the Preservation of Historic Buildings: Historic Preservation Policy in the United States". APT Bulletin. 29 (3/4): 7–11. doi:10.2307/1504604. JSTOR 1504604. ^ a b Scarpino, Philip V. "Planning for Preservation: A Look at the Federal-State Historic Preservation Program, 1966–1986 (in The Intergovernmental Politics of Preservation)" (JSTOR), The Public Historian, Vol. 14, No. 2. (Spring, 1992), pp. 49–66. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ a b c Bearss, Edwin C. "The National Park Service and Its History Program: 1864–1986: An Overview (in The National Park Service and Historic Preservation)" (JSTOR), The Public Historian, Vol. 9, No. 2, The National Park Service and Historic Preservation. (Spring, 1987), pp. 10–18. Retrieved March 22, 2007. ^ a b c Hertfelder, Eric. "The National Park Service and Historic Preservation: Historic Preservation beyond Smokey the Bear (in Commentary: How Well Is the National Park Service Doing?)" (JSTOR), The Public Historian, Vol. 9, No. 2, The National Park Service and Historic Preservation. (Spring, 1987), pp. 135–142. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ "National Register Database and Research - National Register of Historic Places (U.S. National Park Service)". www.nps.gov. Retrieved March 2, 2021. ^ "Department of Transportation Act Archived February 9, 2007, at the Wayback Machine", (PDF), National Park Service, Official site. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ a b c d e f "Criteria Bulletin," National Register of Historic Places, Official site. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ "How to Complete the National Register Registration Form" (PDF). National Register Bulletin. United States Department of the Interior: National Park Service: Cultural Resources. 1997. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 2, 2020. Retrieved December 20, 2020. ^ a b c d e f g h "How to Apply the National Register Criteria for Evaluation Archived December 4, 2013, at the Wayback Machine," (PDF), National Register Bulletins, National Park Service. Retrieved March 22, 2007. ^ "Strengths of Local Listing". Working on the Past:In Local Historic Districts. National Park Service. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. ^ American Legation, NHL Database, National Historic Landmarks Program. Retrieved April 11, 2007. ^ a b "What are the results of a listing?". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. Archived from the original on February 15, 2008. Retrieved August 27, 2013. ^ a b c d Gray, Oscar S. "The Response of Federal Legislation to Historic Preservation" (JSTOR), Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 36, No. 3, Historic Preservation. (Summer, 1971), pp. 314–328. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ "Section 106 Summary Archived June 22, 2013, at the Wayback Machine", Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, Official site, April 26, 2002. ^ "Federal, State and Local Historic Districts, National Park Service. Retrieved March 21, 2007. ^ Lee, Antoinette J. and McClelland Linda F. "How to Complete the National Register Multiple Property Documentation Form, (PDF), National Register Bulletin, National Park Service. Retrieved March 22, 2007. ^ "National Register of Historic Places: Multiple Property Covers as of 06/01/2014". National Park Service. Retrieved September 16, 2014. ^ By contrast, the state of Colorado, for example, does not set any limits on owners of National Register properties. See "National and state registers", at Colorado Office of Archeology & Historic Preservation Archived September 7, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Rehabiliation Standards and Guidelines—Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service". NPS.gov Homepage (U.S. National Park Service). Retrieved November 16, 2017. ^ "Historic Preservation Tax Incentives", Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, Official site. Retrieved March 22, 2007. ^ About the Historic Preservation Tax Incentives, Federal Historic Preservation Tax Incentives, Technical Preservation Services, National Park Service, Official site. Retrieved March 22, 2007. ^ "Save America's Treasures: FAQ" National Park Service. Retrieved March 23, 2007. ^ "Save America's Treasures". National Trust for Historic Preservation. Retrieved March 1, 2013. ^ a b Sprinkle, John H., Jr. (Spring 2007). ""Of Exceptional Importance": The Origins of the "Fifty-Year Rule" in Historic Preservation". The Public Historian. 29 (2): 81–103. doi:10.1525/tph.2007.29.2.81. JSTOR 10.1525/tph.2007.29.2.81. ^ Fallows, James. "Our Towns: How Danville Has Avoided Omaha's Mistake - The Atlantic". www.theatlantic.com. Retrieved May 31, 2021. ^ Church sues over historic site, Caren Burmeister, Jacksonville Times-Union, 3/23/99. Retrieved 7/8/11. ^ Gratz, R.B. (1996) Living City: How America's Cities Are Being Revitalized by Thinking Small in a Big Way. John Wiley and Sons. p. V. ^ National Trust for Historic Preservation and Zagars, J. (1997) Preservation Yellow Pages: The Complete Information Source for Homeowners, Communities, and Professionals. John Wiley and Sons. p.80. ^ "The L.A. architecture landmark — abandoned, trashed and left to burn". latimes.com. Retrieved May 25, 2019. ^ Mikle, Jean. "Asbury Park's Tillie is still safe". Springfield News-Leader. Retrieved October 1, 2017. ^ "Historic Galveston nightclub destroyed". ABC13 Houston. Retrieved July 29, 2019. ^ Blair, Russell. "UConn to Demolish Seven of Nine 'Faculty Row' Houses". courant.com. Retrieved October 1, 2017. ^ "Circus barns on National Register of Historic Places to be demolish". whas11.com. Retrieved April 6, 2021. Further reading[edit] "Title 36, U.S. Code of Federal Regulations". Archived from the original on March 2, 2007. "Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property; CHAPTER I--NATIONAL PARK SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR; PART 60--NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES". National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on March 2, 2007. Retrieved April 11, 2007. "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. Retrieved July 11, 2011. Shrimpton, Rebecca H., ed. (1997). "How to Apply the National Register Criteria for Evaluation". Washington, D.C.: National Park Service. Retrieved April 11, 2007. National Register Bulletin No. 15 Sprinkle, John H., Jr. (2014). Crafting Preservation Criteria. The National Register of Historic Places and American Historic Preservation. New York: Routledge. Wiley, John (1994). National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. ISBN 0-471-14403-7. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Register of Historic Places. www.nps.gov/subjects/nationalregister—National Register of Historic Places www.achp.gov—Advisory Council on Historic Preservation v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places Topics Architectural style categories Contributing property Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places Keeper of the Register National Park Service Property types Lists by state List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks by state: Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Lists by insular areas American Samoa Guam Minor Outlying Islands Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Lists by associated state Federated States of Micronesia Marshall Islands Palau Other areas District of Columbia Morocco Related National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 Historic Preservation Fund List of jails and prisons on the National Register of Historic Places University and college buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places  National Register of Historic Places portal Category Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) ISNI 1 VIAF 1 WorldCat National libraries Norway United States Israel Art research institutes Artist Names (Getty) Other Faceted Application of Subject Terminology Social Networks and Archival Context SUDOC (France) 1 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Register_of_Historic_Places&oldid=1055704959" Categories: National Register of Historic Places 1966 establishments in the United States Historic preservation Heritage registers in the United States Historic sites in the United States National Historic Landmarks of the United States National Park Service Hidden categories: Articles using NRISref without a reference number Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2018 Good articles Pages incorrectly using the Blockquote template Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NLI identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Articles with WORLDCATID identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? Asturianu Az?rbaycanca Bikol Central Boarisch Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara ????? Français Frysk ??? ??????? Ido Italiano ????? Latviešu Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Polski Português ??????? Simple English Suomi Svenska ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 17 November 2021, at 09:45 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement