https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Historic_Landmark National Historic Landmark - Wikipedia National Historic Landmark From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Formal designation assigned by the U.S. federal government to historic buildings and sites in the U.S. and its territories Independence National Historical Park is one of the most widely visited National Historic Landmark Districts. Navajo Nation Council Chamber, the seat of government for the Navajo Nation, Window Rock, Arizona A National Historic Landmark (NHL) is a building, district, object, site, or structure that is officially recognized by the United States government for its outstanding historical significance. Only some 2,500 (~3%) of over 90,000 places listed on the country's National Register of Historic Places are recognized as National Historic Landmarks. A National Historic Landmark District may include contributing properties that are buildings, structures, sites or objects, and it may include non-contributing properties. Contributing properties may or may not also be separately listed. Contents 1 Creation of the program 2 Criteria 3 Current NHLs 4 Other 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Creation of the program[edit] Prior to 1935, efforts to preserve cultural heritage of national importance were made by piecemeal efforts of the United States Congress. In 1935, Congress passed the Historic Sites Act, which authorized the Interior Secretary authority to formally record and organize historic properties, and to designate properties as having "national historical significance", and gave the National Park Service authority to administer historically significant federally owned properties.[1] Over the following decades, surveys such as the Historic American Buildings Survey amassed information about culturally and architecturally significant properties in a program known as the Historic Sites Survey.[2] Most of the designations made under this legislation became National Historic Sites, although the first designation, made December 20, 1935, was for a National Memorial, the Gateway Arch National Park (then known as the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial) in St. Louis, Missouri. The first National Historic Site designation was made for the Salem Maritime National Historic Site on March 17, 1938.[3] In 1960, the National Park Service took on the administration of the survey data gathered under this legislation, and the National Historic Landmark program began to take more formal shape.[4] When the National Register of Historic Places was established in 1966, the National Historic Landmark program was encompassed within it, and rules and procedures for inclusion and designation were formalized. Because listings (either on the National Register, or as an NHL) often triggered local preservation laws, legislation in 1980 amended the listing procedures to require owner agreement to the designations.[5] On October 9, 1960, 92 properties were announced as designated NHLs by Secretary of the Interior Fred A. Seaton. The Sergeant Floyd Monument in Sioux City, Iowa, was officially designated on June 30 of that year, but for various reasons, the public announcement of the first several NHLs was delayed. Criteria[edit] Central Park in New York City is a prominent National Historic Landmark. New York City has 116 NHLs, more than any other city in the US. NHLs are designated by the United States Secretary of the Interior because they are: Sites where events of national historical significance occurred; Places where prominent persons lived or worked; Icons of ideals that shaped the nation; Outstanding examples of design or construction; Places characterizing a way of life; or Archeological sites able to yield information. Current NHLs[edit] More than 2,500 NHLs have been designated. Most, but not all, are in the United States. The American Legation in Tangier, Morocco, was the first National Historic Landmark on foreign soil. There are NHLs in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. Three states (Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and New York) account for nearly 25 percent of the nation's NHLs. Three cities within these states (Philadelphia, Boston, and New York City, respectively) all separately have more NHLs than 40 of the 50 states. In fact, New York City alone has more NHLs than all but five states: Virginia, California, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and New York (the latter of which has the most NHLs of all 50 states). There are 74 NHLs in the District of Columbia. Some NHLs are in U.S. commonwealths and territories, associated states, and foreign states. There are 15 in Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and other U.S. commonwealths and territories; five in U.S.-associated states such as Micronesia; and one in Morocco.[6][7] Over 100 ships or shipwrecks have been designated as NHLs. Other[edit] About half of the National Historic Landmarks are privately owned.[8] The National Historic Landmarks Program relies on suggestions for new designations from the National Park Service, which also assists in maintaining the landmarks. A friends' group of owners and managers, the National Historic Landmark Stewards Association, works to preserve, protect and promote National Historic Landmarks. If not already listed on the National Register of Historic Places, an NHL is automatically added to the Register upon designation. About three percent of Register listings are NHLs.[9] See also[edit] American Water Landmark List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks by state List of churches that are National Historic Landmarks in the United States Listed building, a similar designation in the UK National Historic Sites, Events, and Persons, similar designations in Canada National Natural Landmark United States Memorials United States National Register of Historic Places listings References[edit] ^ Robinson, Nicholas. Environmental Regulation of Real Property, Volume 1. New York: Law Journal Press, 1982. pp. 6:22–23. ^ Lee, Antoinette Josephine. The American Mosaic: Preserving a Nation's Heritage. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1997. ISBN 978-0-8143-2719-7. p. 7 ^ McDonnell, Janet; Mackintosh, Barry. The National Parks: Shaping the System. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2005. ISBN 978-0-912627-73-1. p. 52 ^ Frank, Karolin; Petersen, Patricia. Historic Preservation in the USA. Berlin: Springer, 2002. ISBN 978-3-540-41735-4. p. 66 ^ Robinson, p. 6:24 ^ National Park Service (November 2007). "National Historic Landmarks Survey: List of National Historic Landmarks by State" (PDF). Retrieved July 1, 2008. ^ The counts and locations of NHLs are described most accurately in List of National Historic Landmarks by state. This extends, and corrects errors from, the National Park Service's "National Historic Landmarks Survey List of National Historic Landmarks by State", also referenced. ^ National Historic Landmarks Update, National Park Service, October 2004 ^ "Title 36 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 65". US Government Printing Office. Archived from the original on February 17, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2008. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Historic Landmarks of the United States. Official National Historic Landmarks Program website A History of the NHL Program List of National Historic Landmarks National Historic Landmarks: Archaeological Properties Historical Landmarks - United States Lighthouses v t e National Historic Landmarks by state State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Boston Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York New York City North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Philadelphia Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Federal district District of Columbia Other Insular area American Samoa Midway Islands Northern Marianas Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Wake Island Associated state Marshall Islands Federated States of Micronesia Palau Foreign country Morocco v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places Topics Architectural style categories Contributing property Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places Keeper of the Register National Park Service Property types Lists by state List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks by state: Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Lists by insular areas American Samoa Guam Minor Outlying Islands Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Lists by associated state Federated States of Micronesia Marshall Islands Palau Other areas District of Columbia Morocco Related National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 Historic Preservation Fund List of jails and prisons on the National Register of Historic Places University and college buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places  National Register of Historic Places portal Category v t e Federal Historic sites of the United States Battlefields Battlefield Parks Battlefield Site Historic Landmarks National Historic Sites International Historic Site Historic Trails Historical Parks Historical Reserves Memorials Military Parks Monuments See also: National Register of Historic Places Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Historic_Landmark&oldid=1032043099" Categories: National Historic Landmarks of the United States Landmarks in the United States National Register of Historic Places Historic preservation in the United States Historic preservation 1960 establishments in the United States National Park Service areas Hidden categories: Articles with short description Articles with long short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from June 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? Asturianu Az?rbaycanca ?????????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français ??? ??????? Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latviešu Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Polski Português ??????? Simple English Suomi Svenska ????? ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 5 July 2021, at 06:32 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Historic_Landmark National Historic Landmark - Wikipedia National Historic Landmark From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Formal designation assigned by the U.S. federal government to historic buildings and sites in the U.S. and its territories Independence National Historical Park is one of the most widely visited National Historic Landmark Districts. Navajo Nation Council Chamber, the seat of government for the Navajo Nation, Window Rock, Arizona A National Historic Landmark (NHL) is a building, district, object, site, or structure that is officially recognized by the United States government for its outstanding historical significance. Only some 2,500 (~3%) of over 90,000 places listed on the country's National Register of Historic Places are recognized as National Historic Landmarks. A National Historic Landmark District may include contributing properties that are buildings, structures, sites or objects, and it may include non-contributing properties. Contributing properties may or may not also be separately listed. Contents 1 Creation of the program 2 Criteria 3 Current NHLs 4 Other 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Creation of the program[edit] Prior to 1935, efforts to preserve cultural heritage of national importance were made by piecemeal efforts of the United States Congress. In 1935, Congress passed the Historic Sites Act, which authorized the Interior Secretary authority to formally record and organize historic properties, and to designate properties as having "national historical significance", and gave the National Park Service authority to administer historically significant federally owned properties.[1] Over the following decades, surveys such as the Historic American Buildings Survey amassed information about culturally and architecturally significant properties in a program known as the Historic Sites Survey.[2] Most of the designations made under this legislation became National Historic Sites, although the first designation, made December 20, 1935, was for a National Memorial, the Gateway Arch National Park (then known as the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial) in St. Louis, Missouri. The first National Historic Site designation was made for the Salem Maritime National Historic Site on March 17, 1938.[3] In 1960, the National Park Service took on the administration of the survey data gathered under this legislation, and the National Historic Landmark program began to take more formal shape.[4] When the National Register of Historic Places was established in 1966, the National Historic Landmark program was encompassed within it, and rules and procedures for inclusion and designation were formalized. Because listings (either on the National Register, or as an NHL) often triggered local preservation laws, legislation in 1980 amended the listing procedures to require owner agreement to the designations.[5] On October 9, 1960, 92 properties were announced as designated NHLs by Secretary of the Interior Fred A. Seaton. The Sergeant Floyd Monument in Sioux City, Iowa, was officially designated on June 30 of that year, but for various reasons, the public announcement of the first several NHLs was delayed. Criteria[edit] Central Park in New York City is a prominent National Historic Landmark. New York City has 116 NHLs, more than any other city in the US. NHLs are designated by the United States Secretary of the Interior because they are: Sites where events of national historical significance occurred; Places where prominent persons lived or worked; Icons of ideals that shaped the nation; Outstanding examples of design or construction; Places characterizing a way of life; or Archeological sites able to yield information. Current NHLs[edit] More than 2,500 NHLs have been designated. Most, but not all, are in the United States. The American Legation in Tangier, Morocco, was the first National Historic Landmark on foreign soil. There are NHLs in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. Three states (Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and New York) account for nearly 25 percent of the nation's NHLs. Three cities within these states (Philadelphia, Boston, and New York City, respectively) all separately have more NHLs than 40 of the 50 states. In fact, New York City alone has more NHLs than all but five states: Virginia, California, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and New York (the latter of which has the most NHLs of all 50 states). There are 74 NHLs in the District of Columbia. Some NHLs are in U.S. commonwealths and territories, associated states, and foreign states. There are 15 in Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and other U.S. commonwealths and territories; five in U.S.-associated states such as Micronesia; and one in Morocco.[6][7] Over 100 ships or shipwrecks have been designated as NHLs. Other[edit] About half of the National Historic Landmarks are privately owned.[8] The National Historic Landmarks Program relies on suggestions for new designations from the National Park Service, which also assists in maintaining the landmarks. A friends' group of owners and managers, the National Historic Landmark Stewards Association, works to preserve, protect and promote National Historic Landmarks. If not already listed on the National Register of Historic Places, an NHL is automatically added to the Register upon designation. About three percent of Register listings are NHLs.[9] See also[edit] American Water Landmark List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks by state List of churches that are National Historic Landmarks in the United States Listed building, a similar designation in the UK National Historic Sites, Events, and Persons, similar designations in Canada National Natural Landmark United States Memorials United States National Register of Historic Places listings References[edit] ^ Robinson, Nicholas. Environmental Regulation of Real Property, Volume 1. New York: Law Journal Press, 1982. pp. 6:22–23. ^ Lee, Antoinette Josephine. The American Mosaic: Preserving a Nation's Heritage. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1997. ISBN 978-0-8143-2719-7. p. 7 ^ McDonnell, Janet; Mackintosh, Barry. The National Parks: Shaping the System. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2005. ISBN 978-0-912627-73-1. p. 52 ^ Frank, Karolin; Petersen, Patricia. Historic Preservation in the USA. Berlin: Springer, 2002. ISBN 978-3-540-41735-4. p. 66 ^ Robinson, p. 6:24 ^ National Park Service (November 2007). "National Historic Landmarks Survey: List of National Historic Landmarks by State" (PDF). Retrieved July 1, 2008. ^ The counts and locations of NHLs are described most accurately in List of National Historic Landmarks by state. This extends, and corrects errors from, the National Park Service's "National Historic Landmarks Survey List of National Historic Landmarks by State", also referenced. ^ National Historic Landmarks Update, National Park Service, October 2004 ^ "Title 36 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 65". US Government Printing Office. Archived from the original on February 17, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2008. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Historic Landmarks of the United States. Official National Historic Landmarks Program website A History of the NHL Program List of National Historic Landmarks National Historic Landmarks: Archaeological Properties Historical Landmarks - United States Lighthouses v t e National Historic Landmarks by state State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Boston Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York New York City North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Philadelphia Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Federal district District of Columbia Other Insular area American Samoa Midway Islands Northern Marianas Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Wake Island Associated state Marshall Islands Federated States of Micronesia Palau Foreign country Morocco v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places Topics Architectural style categories Contributing property Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places Keeper of the Register National Park Service Property types Lists by state List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks by state: Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Lists by insular areas American Samoa Guam Minor Outlying Islands Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Lists by associated state Federated States of Micronesia Marshall Islands Palau Other areas District of Columbia Morocco Related National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 Historic Preservation Fund List of jails and prisons on the National Register of Historic Places University and college buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places  National Register of Historic Places portal Category v t e Federal Historic sites of the United States Battlefields Battlefield Parks Battlefield Site Historic Landmarks National Historic Sites International Historic Site Historic Trails Historical Parks Historical Reserves Memorials Military Parks Monuments See also: National Register of Historic Places Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Historic_Landmark&oldid=1032043099" Categories: National Historic Landmarks of the United States Landmarks in the United States National Register of Historic Places Historic preservation in the United States Historic preservation 1960 establishments in the United States National Park Service areas Hidden categories: Articles with short description Articles with long short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from June 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? Asturianu Az?rbaycanca ?????????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français ??? ??????? Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latviešu Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ??? Polski Português ??????? Simple English Suomi Svenska ????? ??? Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 5 July 2021, at 06:32 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement