https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_York_City_Ballet New York City Ballet - Wikipedia New York City Ballet From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search American ballet company "NYCB" redirects here. For the bank, see New York Community Bank. For the breakdancing crew and hip hop group, see New York City Breakers. "City Ballet" redirects here. For Web series, see AOL Originals. New York City Ballet General information Name New York City Ballet Previous names American Ballet Ballet Caravan American Ballet Caravan The Ballet Society Year founded 1948 Founders George Balanchine Lincoln Kirstein Founding choreographers George Balanchine Jerome Robbins Principal venue David H. Koch Theater Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts New York City Saratoga Performing Arts Center, Saratoga Springs, NY Website www.nycballet.com Artistic staff Artistic Director Jonathan Stafford (and Wendy Whelan, Associate Artistic Director) Ballet Mistress Rosemary Dunleavy Music Director Andrew Litton Other Orchestra The New York City Ballet Orchestra Official school School of American Ballet Associated schools New York Choreographic Institute Formation Principal Dancer Soloist Corps de Ballet New York City Ballet (NYCB) is a ballet company founded in 1948 by choreographer George Balanchine[1] and Lincoln Kirstein.[2] Balanchine and Jerome Robbins are considered the founding choreographers of the company. Léon Barzin was the company's first music director. City Ballet grew out of earlier troupes: the Producing Company of the School of American Ballet,[3] 1934; the American Ballet,[4] 1935, and Ballet Caravan, 1936, which merged into American Ballet Caravan,[5] 1941; and directly from the Ballet Society,[6][7] 1946. Contents 1 History 1.1 Salute to Italy 1.2 Stravinsky Festival 1.3 Ravel Festival 1.4 Tschaikovsky Festival 1.5 Stravinsky Centennial Celebration 1.6 New York State Theater 20-Year Celebration 1.7 Peter Martins 1.7.1 American Music Festival 1.8 Jerome Robbins celebration 1.9 Dancers' Choice 2 Programming 3 $30 for 30 and Fourth Ring Society/Society NYCB 4 New York Choreographic Institute 5 Dancers 5.1 Principal Dancers 6 Artistic staff 6.1 Balletmistress 6.2 Balletmasters 6.3 Guest teachers 6.4 Children's ballet mistress 6.4.1 Assistant children's ballet master 6.5 Resident choreographer 7 The New York City Ballet Orchestra 7.1 Music director 7.2 Staff conductors 7.3 Historical music directors 7.4 Other conductors of note 8 Controversies 8.1 Misconduct allegations against Peter Martins 8.2 Nude photos allegation 9 See also 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links History[edit] New York City Ballet in Amsterdam with George Balanchine In a 1946 letter, Kirstein stated, "The only justification I have is to enable Balanchine to do exactly what he wants to do in the way he wants to do it."[8] He served as the company's General Director from 1946 to 1989, developing and sustaining it by his organizational and fundraising abilities.[8] The company was named New York City Ballet in 1948 when it became resident at City Center of Music and Drama.[9][10] Its success was marked by its move to the New York State Theater, now David H. Koch Theater, designed by Philip Johnson to Balanchine's specifications. City Ballet became the first ballet company in the United States to have two permanent venue engagements: one at Lincoln Center's David H. Koch Theater on 63rd Street in Manhattan, and another at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center, in Saratoga Springs, New York. The School of American Ballet (S.A.B.), which Balanchine founded, is the training school of the company. After the company's move to the State Theater, Balanchine's creativity as a choreographer flourished. He created works that were the basis of the company's repertory until his death in 1983. He worked closely with choreographer Jerome Robbins, who resumed his connection with the company in 1969 after having produced works for Broadway. NYCB still has the largest repertoire by far of any American ballet company. It often stages 60 ballets or more in its winter and spring seasons at Lincoln Center each year, and 20 or more in its summer season in Saratoga Springs. City Ballet has performed The Nutcracker, Romeo and Juliet, A Midsummer Night's Dream, and many more. City Ballet has trained and developed many great dancers since its formation. Many dancers with already developed reputations have also joined the ballet as principal dancers: Merrill Ashley Mikhail Baryshnikov Ashley Bouder Jacques d'Amboise Suzanne Farrell Melissa Hayden Sterling Hyltin Jillana Allegra Kent Gelsey Kirkland Tanaquil LeClercq Nicholas Magallanes[11] Peter Martins Nilas Martins Patricia McBride Sara Mearns Monique Meunier Arthur Mitchell Francisco Moncion[12] Kyra Nichols Tiler Peck Teresa Reichlen Jock Soto Maria Tallchief Edward Villella Salute to Italy [edit] See also: Category:New York City Ballet Salute to Italy In 1960, Balanchine mounted City Ballet's Salute to Italy with premieres of Monumentum pro Gesualdo and Variations from Don Sebastian (called the Donizetti Variations since 1961), as well as performances of his La Sonnambula and Lew Christensen's Con Amore. The performance was repeated in 1968. Stravinsky Festival [edit] See also: Category:New York City Ballet Stravinsky Festival David H. Koch Theater, pre-renovation In 1972, Balanchine offered an eight-day tribute to the composer, his great collaborator, who had died the year before. His programs included twenty-two new works of his own dances, plus works by choreographers Todd Bolender, John Clifford, Lorca Massine, Jerome Robbins, Richard Tanner, and John Taras, as well as repertory ballets by Balanchine and Robbins. Balanchine created Symphony in Three Movements, Duo Concertant, and Violin Concerto for the occasion. He and Robbins co-choreographed and performed in Pulcinella. Balanchine had produced an earlier Stravinsky festival in 1937 as balletmaster of the American Ballet while engaged by the Metropolitan Opera. The composer conducted the April 27th premiere of Card Party. Ravel Festival [edit] In 1975, Balanchine paid his respects to the French composer Maurice Ravel with a two-week Hommage à Ravel. Balanchine, Robbins, Jacques d'Amboise, and Taras made sixteen new ballets for the occasion. Repertory ballets were performed as well. High points included Balanchine's Le Tombeau de Couperin and Robbins' Mother Goose. Tschaikovsky Festival [edit] In 1981, Balanchine planned a two-week NYCB festival honoring the Russian composer Peter Ilyitch Tschaikovsky. Balanchine, Joseph Duell, d'Amboise, Peter Martins, Robbins, and Taras created twelve new dances. In addition to presenting these and repertory ballets, Balanchine re-choreographed his Mozartiana from 1933. Philip Johnson and John Burgee's stage setting of translucent tubing was designed to be hung and lit in different architectural configurations throughout the entire festival.[13] Stravinsky Centennial Celebration[edit] See also: Category:New York City Ballet Stravinsky Centennial Celebration In 1982, Balanchine organized a centennial celebration in honor of his long-time collaborator Igor Stravinsky, during which the City Ballet performed twenty-five ballets set to the composer's music. Balanchine made three new ballets, Tango, Élégie, and Persephone, and a new version of Variations.[14] The choreographer died the following year. Balanchine's 50th Anniversary Celebration was held by the company in 2002. New York State Theater 20-Year Celebration[edit] On April 26, 1984, NYCB celebrated the 20th anniversary of the New York State Theater. The program started with Igor Stravinsky's Fanfare for a New Theater, followed by Stravinsky's arrangement of The Star-Spangled Banner. The ballets included three of Balanchine's works, Serenade, Stravinsky Violin Concerto, and Sonatine; and Jerome Robbins' Afternoon of a Faun. The performers included Maria Calegari, Kyra Nichols, Heather Watts, Leonid Kozlov, Afshin Mofid, Patricia McBride, Helgi Tomasson, Karin von Aroldingen, Lourdes Lopez, Bart Cook, and Joseph Duell.[15] Peter Martins[edit] After Balanchine's death in 1983, Peter Martins was selected as balletmaster of the company. After 30 years, Martins was judged to have maintained the New York City Ballet's financial security and the musicality and performance level of the dancers, but he has not emphasized the Balanchine style to the extent that many observers expected he would. Martins retired from his position in 2018.[16] American Music Festival[edit] See also: Category:New York City Ballet American Music Festival For the company's 40th anniversary, Martins held an American Music Festival, having commissioned dances from choreographers Laura Dean, Eliot Feld, William Forsythe, Lar Lubovitch, Paul Taylor. He also presented ballets by George Balanchine and Robbins. The programs included world premieres of more than twenty dances. Martins contributed Barber Violin Concerto, Black and White, The Chairman Dances, A Fool for You, Fred and George, Sophisticated Lady, Tanzspiel, Tea-Rose, and The Waltz Project.[13] Jerome Robbins celebration[edit] A major component of the Spring 2008 season was a celebration of Jerome Robbins; major revivals were mounted of the following ballets: 2 and 3 Part Inventions Afternoon of a Faun Andantino Antique Epigraphs Brahms/Handel Brandenburg The Cage The Concert Dances at a Gathering Dybbuk Fancy Free Fanfare Four Bagatelles The Four Seasons Glass Pieces The Goldberg Variations I'm Old Fashioned In G Major In Memory of ... In the Night Interplay Ives, Songs NY Export: Opus Jazz Les Noces Opus 19/The Dreamer Other Dances Piano Pieces A Suite of Dances Watermill West Side Story Suite Dancers' Choice [edit] Friday, June 27, 2008, the first Dancers' Choice benefit was held for the Dancers' Emergency Fund. The program was initiated by Peter Martins, conceived and supervised by principal dancer Jonathan Stafford, assisted by Kyle Froman, Craig Hall, Amanda Hankes, Adam Hendrickson, Ask la Cour, Henry Seth, and Daniel Ulbricht, and consisted of: Beethoven Romance Flit of Fury/The Monarch[17]   and excerpts from: Ecstatic Orange Jewels Emeralds Rubies Square Dance Interplay Dances at a Gathering Glass Pieces Union Jack Stars and Stripes Mercurial Manoeuvres Symphony in C On June 14, 2009, the second Dancers' Choice benefit was held at a special evening performance. The program included Sleeping Beauty and Union Jack.[18][19] The program was supervised by principal dancer Jenifer Ringer. Programming[edit] Peter Martins, former NYCB artistic director, in 2009 NYCB performs fall, winter and spring repertory seasons at the David H. Koch Theater at Lincoln Center as well as George Balanchine's Nutcracker during November and December; they have a summer residency at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center and regularly tour internationally. Introductory talks about a current performance, called First Position Discussions,[20] are held before some performances or during some intervals in the fourth ring, house right; the docents are volunteers and include laymen as well as former dancers. Hour-long Inside NYCB events explore the history and inner workings of the company through performance and discussion, often with dancers and artistic staff.[21] Other public programs include Family Saturdays, one-hour interactive programs for children 5 and up;[22] Children's Workshops and In Motion Workshops, pre-performance explorations of the music, movement, and themes of a ballet featured in the matinee performance for children ages 5–8 and 9-11, respectively;[23][24] and Ballet Essentials, a 75-minute informal ballet class for adults ages 21 and up with little to no prior dance experience.[25] These programs are all facilitated by NYCB dancers. $30 for 30 and Fourth Ring Society/Society NYCB [edit] New York City Ballet offers tickets for $30 to select performances for patrons ages 13 to 30 at the box office, or online or by phone with an account; sales for each performance week (Tue. evening through Sun. matinee) begin at 10:00 a.m. on the Monday of that week.[26] New York City Ballet's Fourth Ring Society offered discounted tickets to all shows in the theater's Fourth Ring for a small annual fee. This program was closed to new members in 2011 and renamed Society NYCB to reflect an expanded offering of discounted seats in all sections of the theater, although over time a few ballet programs (e.g., Nutcracker) and individual dates became unavailable.[27][28] New York Choreographic Institute[edit] City Ballet's Choreographic Institute was founded by Irene Diamond and Peter Martins in 2000. It has three main programmatic programs: choreographic sessions, providing choreographers with dancers and studio space; fellowship initiatives, annual awards in support of an emerging choreographer affiliated with a ballet company; and choreographic forums, symposia and round-table discussions on choreography, music, and design elements.[29] Dancers[edit] Principal Dancers[edit] Name Nationality Training Joined NYCB Promoted to Principal Jared Angle  United States Allegheny Ballet Academy School of American Ballet 1998 2005 Tyler Angle  United States Allegheny Ballet Academy School of American Ballet 2004 2009 Ashley Bouder  United States Central Pennsylvania Youth Ballet School of American Ballet 2000 2005 Adrian Danchig-Waring  United States Dance Theatre Seven School of American Ballet 2003 2013 Megan Fairchild  United States Dance Concepts Ballet West Conservatory School of American Ballet 2002 2005 Gonzalo Garcia  Spain Maria Avila's school San Francisco Ballet School 2007 2007 Joseph Gordon  United States Phoenix Dance Academy School of American Ballet 2012 2018 Anthony Huxley  United States School of American Ballet San Francisco Ballet School Contra Costa Ballet School 2007 2015 Sterling Hyltin  United States Dallas Metropolitan Ballet School of American Ballet 2003 2007 Russell Janzen  United States The Rock School for Dance Education School of American Ballet 2008 2017 Maria Kowroski  United States School of Grand Rapids Ballet School of American Ballet 1995 1999 Ask la Cour  Denmark Royal Danish Ballet School 2002 2013 Lauren Lovette  United States California Dance Theatre Cary Ballet Conservatory School of American Ballet 2010 2015 Sara Mearns  United States Calvert-Brodie School of Dance School of North Carolina Dance Theatre South Carolina Governor's School for the Arts and Humanities School of American Ballet 2004 2008 Tiler Peck  United States Bakersfield Dance Company Conjunctive Point Westside School of Ballet School of American Ballet 2005 2009 Unity Phelan  United States Princeton Ballet School School of American Ballet 2012 2021 Amar Ramasar  United States School of American Ballet American Ballet Theatre Summer Program The Rock School for Dance Education 2001 2009 Teresa Reichlen  United States Russell School of Ballet School of American Ballet 2001 2009 Abi Stafford  United States Central Pennsylvania Youth Ballet School of American Ballet 2000 2007 Taylor Stanley  United States The Rock School for Dance Education Miami City Ballet Summer Program School of American Ballet 2010 2016 Daniel Ulbricht  United States Judith Lee Johnson Studio of Dance Les Jeunes Danseurs Chautauqua Summer Dance Program School of American Ballet 2001 2007 Andrew Veyette  United States Dance Arts (Visalia, California) Westside Ballet School of American Ballet 2000 2007 Artistic staff[edit] The following is the current artistic staff (except dancers, who are listed at List of New York City Ballet dancers):[30] Balletmistress[edit] Rosemary Dunleavy Balletmasters[edit] Jean-Pierre Frohlich Craig Hall Susan Hendl Lisa Jackson Russell Kaiser Glenn Keenan Rebecca Krohn Sara Leland Christine Redpath Richard Tanner Kathleen Tracey Guest teachers[edit] Espen Giljane Arch Higgins Darci Kistler Andrei Kramarevsky Children's ballet mistress[edit] Dena Abergel Assistant children's ballet master[edit] Arch Higgins Resident choreographer[edit] Justin Peck[31] The New York City Ballet Orchestra[edit] The 66-member NYCB Orchestra is an important symphonic institution in its own right, having played for virtually all of the thousands of performances NYCB has given over the decades. It is one of the most versatile orchestras in the world, on any given week performing perhaps three or four times the repertoire that another symphony might be expected to do.[32] Principal players of the orchestra also perform the majority of the concertos, other solos, and chamber music in the NYCB repertory as well. The orchestra accompanies the ballet on all of its North American tours, and while the ballet uses local orchestras on its international tours, members of the NYCB Orchestra often go along as soloists or extras. Besides the members of the orchestra, the NYCB has six pianists on full-time staff.[33] They all perform in the pit with the orchestra on a regular basis. The NYCB Orchestra also occasionally accompanies dance companies from other cities at the Koch Theater. These have included the Australian Ballet in the Spring 2012,[34] and the San Francisco Ballet[35] in the Fall 2013. In January 2019, it was announced that an anonymous donor had funded the renaming of the orchestra pit as the "Stravinsky Orchestra Pit" . Music director[edit] Andrew Litton was appointed to the position on December 16, 2014, and started in September 2015.[36] Staff conductors[edit] Clotilde Otranto Andrews Sill (acting Music Director 2012–2014 and Associate Music Director 2014–present) Daniel Capps Ryan McAdams (associate conductor 2011) Historical music directors[edit] Leon Barzin, 1948–c1963 Robert Irving ("The Duke"), c.1963–1989 Gordon Boelzner, 1989-2000 Andrea Quinn, 2000–2006 Fayçal Karoui, 2006–2012 Other conductors of note[edit] Hugo Fiorato (retired 2004) (Conductor Emeritus), Maurice Kaplow (retired 2010 as Principal Conductor) Controversies[edit] Misconduct allegations against Peter Martins[edit] In December 2017, Martins took a leave of absence from the New York City Ballet following an allegation of sexual misconduct made against him.[37][38][39] Five City Ballet dancers later told the New York Times that Martins had verbally or physical abused them; Martins denied engaging in any misconduct.[40][41] Martins retired from the City Ballet on January 1, 2018.[41] An independent inquiry commissioned by NYCB and SAB and led by employment-law attorney Barbara E. Hoey did not corroborate the allegations of harassment or violence made against Martins, according to a joint statement issued by the company and school. The report itself was not made public.[42][43][44][45] Nude photos allegation[edit] In September 2018, Alexandra Waterbury, an ex-girlfriend of NYCB principal dancer Chase Finlay, began a civil action in New York County Supreme Court against Finlay, principal dancers Amar Ramasar and Zachary Catazaro, NYCB patron Jared Longhitano, New York City Ballet and SAB. Her lawsuit claimed harm by Finlay for allegedly taking and sharing sexually explicit photos and videos of Waterbury without her knowledge or consent, and by Ramasar, Catazaro, Longhitano, NYCB and SAB for allegedly contributing to that harm in various ways.[46] All defendants disputed key factual allegations made in the complaint as well as their liability as a matter of law; they all filed motions to dismiss.[47] The case is currently pending disposition. Waterbury's lawsuit led to Finlay's resignation and the firing of Ramasar and Catazaro.[48] In April 2019 an arbitrator ordered Ramasar and Catazaro reinstated; Catazaro decided not to rejoin the company.[49] See also[edit] In the Wings: Behind the Scenes at the New York City Ballet, 2007 book References[edit] ^ Jane Philbin Wood (November 1998). "Memories of Ballet Society and choreographer George Balanchine". Dance Magazine. Archived from the original on 2005-12-24. Retrieved 2008-06-05. ^ Laura Raucher (2008). "Kirstein 100: A Tribute Online Exhibition". New York City Ballet. Retrieved 2008-06-05. ^ Martin, John (November 4, 1934). "The Dance: American Ballet in debut; A New Group Emerges From Training for First Public Tour". The New York Times. ^ Martin, John (June 28, 1936). "The Dance: A new troupe; Group From the American Ballet Organizes Summer Tour". The New York Times. ^ Martin, John (May 18, 1941). "The Danse: Bon voyage; American Ballet Caravan Is Revived to Make Extended South American Tour". The New York Times. ^ "New Ballet Group enters field here; Balanchine Is Artistic Director of Ballet Society, Which Will Open Season on Nov.20". The New York Times. October 21, 1946. ^ Martin, John (October 27, 1946). "The Dance: New Ballet; In 'Three Virgins and a Devil'". The New York Times. Retrieved 2009-06-28. ^ a b Alastair Macaulay, "A Paragon of the Arts, as Both Man and Titan" (review of Martin Duberman, The Worlds of Lincoln Kirstein), Books of the Times, New York Times, 4 May 2007, accessed 5 January 2015 ^ Martin, John (June 27, 1948). "The Dance: City Ballet". The New York Times. Retrieved 2009-06-28. ^ Martin, John (October 12, 1948). "City Ballet Group in First Program; Works by Balanchine Offered by Unit as Series of Dance Performances Begins". The New York Times. ^ Nicholas Magallanes Obituary, The New York Times, 5 May 1977 on www.nytimes.com ^ Anna Kisselgoff, "Francisco Moncion, 76, a Charter Member of New York City Ballet." obituary, New York Times, 4 April 1985. ^ a b A festival of the same name is planned for 2013. ^ Dunning, Jennifer (June 11, 1982). "City Ballet opens 8-day celebration of Stravinsky". The New York Times. Retrieved 2009-06-28. ^ Anderson, Jack (April 26, 1984). "City Ballet: A 20-Year Celebration". The New York Times. Retrieved 2009-05-02. ^ Sulcas, Roslyn (19 April 2013). "City Ballet's Leader, 30 Years In". New York Times. New York City, United States. Retrieved 22 April 2013. ^ Flit of Fury/The Monarch: premiere ^ Macaulay, Alastair (June 15, 2009). "When the Performers Write the Program". The New York Times. ^ Dreyer, Lindsay (June 22, 2009). "New York City Ballet's Second Annual Dancers' Choice Benefit Performance". Dancer Universe Blog. Archived from the original on May 16, 2010. ^ "First Position Discussions". NYCB. Retrieved April 27, 2017. ^ "Inside NYCB". NYCB. Retrieved April 27, 2017. ^ "Family Saturdays". NYCB. Retrieved April 27, 2017. ^ "Children's Workshops". NYCB. Retrieved April 27, 2017. ^ "In Motion Workshops". NYCB. Retrieved April 27, 2017. ^ "Ballet Essentials". NYCB. Retrieved April 27, 2017. ^ "$30 for 30". NYCB. Retrieved September 6, 2019. ^ "City Ballet Offers New Discount Program". New York Times. 10 August 2011. Retrieved 6 September 2019. ^ Wakin, Daniel J. (22 June 2011). "City Ballet Raises Ticket Cost and Ire". The New York Times. Retrieved April 27, 2017. ^ "New York Choreographic Institute". NYCB. Retrieved 27 April 2017. ^ "Artistic Staff". New York City Ballet. 2016. Retrieved 2016-05-18. ^ Sulcas, Roslyn (2014-07-09). "New York City Ballet Names Justin Peck as Choreographer". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2015-10-06. ^ "New York City Ballet Orchestra Musicians". nycbo.org. Retrieved 27 April 2017. ^ "NYCB Orchestra". NYCB. Retrieved 27 April 2017. ^ MacAulay, Alastair (17 June 2012). "'Swan Lake' by Australian Ballet at Koch Theater". The New York Times. Retrieved April 27, 2017. ^ Seibert, Brian (18 October 2013). "San Francisco Ballet in Ratmansky and Morris Works". The New York Times. Retrieved April 27, 2017. ^ Cooper, Michael (17 December 2014). "Andrew Litton to Lead New York City Ballet Orchestra". The New York Times. Retrieved April 27, 2017. ^ "New York City Ballet leader to take leave amid sexual, violence allegations". Washington Post. December 7, 2017. Retrieved 7 September 2019. ^ Lauren Wingenroth (December 8, 2017). "Peter Martins Is Taking A Leave of Absence As More Accusations Surface". Dance. ^ Robin Pogrebin, City Ballet's Peter Martins Takes Leave of Absence After Misconduct Accusation, New York Times (December 7, 2017). ^ Robin Pogrebin, Five Dancers Accuse City Ballet’s Peter Martins of Physical Abuse, New York Times (December 12, 2017). ^ a b Pogrebin, Robin (January 1, 2018). "Peter Martins Retires From New York City Ballet After Misconduct Allegations". The New York Times. ^ Robin Pogrebin, Abuse Accusations Against Peter Martins Are Not Corroborated, Inquiry Says, New York Times (February 15, 2018). ^ "BARBARA E. HOEY, Partner". Law Firm of Kelley Drye. Retrieved September 6, 2019. ^ "NYCB and SAB Have Announced the Results of the Peter Martins Harassment Investigation". Dance Magazine. February 16, 2018. Retrieved September 6, 2019. ^ "NYCB's Internal Investigation Does Not Corroborate Sexual Harassment Claims Against Peter Martins". Pointe Magazine. February 16, 2018. Retrieved September 7, 2019. ^ "Waterbury v. Chase Finlay et al". Docket List, No. 1, No. 3, No. 77. Retrieved September 11, 2019. ^ "Waterbury v. Finlay et al". Docket List. Motions 001–010. Retrieved 6 September 2019. ^ "- The Washington Post". washingtonpost.com. Retrieved 2018-10-05. ^ "City Ballet Ordered to Reinstate Male Dancers Fired Over Inappropriate Texts". The New York Times. April 19, 2019. Retrieved 6 September 2019. Bibliography[edit] New York City portal Balanchine. A Biography, Bernard Taper. Collier Books Edition. The New York City Ballet. Thirty Years, Lincoln Kirstein. The New York City Ballet, Anatole Chujoy. Knopf. 1953. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to New York City Ballet. Official website Official website - School of American Ballet "New York City Ballet collected news and commentary". The New York Times. New York City Ballet records, 1934-1976 - Jerome Robbins Dance Division, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts New York City Ballet scores, 1930-1965 - Music Division, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts Merrill Ashley papers, 1950-2017 Jerome Robbins Dance Division, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts Costas dance photographs, 1966-2016 - Jerome Robbins Dance Division, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts https://archive.org/details/dancenewyorkcityballet USA Dance: New York City Ballet (1965)] - Educational film featuring George Balanchine and performances by dancers of the New York City Ballet including Arthur Mitchell, Suzanne Farrell, Patricia McBride, Edward Villella, Jacques D'Amboise and Melisa Hayden on archive.org Archive footage of Merrill Ashley and John Meehan performing the pas de deux from Agon in 1987 at Jacob's Pillow v t e Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts Venues Alice Tully Hall Damrosch Park David Geffen Hall David H. Koch Theater Rose Hall Metropolitan Opera House Vivian Beaumont Theater Walter Reade Theater Resident companies Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center Film Society of Lincoln Center Jazz at Lincoln Center Juilliard School Lincoln Center Theater Metropolitan Opera New York City Ballet New York City Opera New York Philharmonic New York Public Library for the Performing Arts School of American Ballet Related topics Subway station Lincoln Square v t e Dance companies in the United States Ballet Alabama Ballet Alameda Civic Ballet Alexandra Ballet Alonzo King LINES Ballet American Ballet Theatre American Repertory Ballet Anaheim Ballet Aspen Santa Fe Ballet Atlanta Ballet Atlanta Festival Ballet Ballet Arizona Ballet Austin Ballet Des Moines Ballet Fantastique Ballet Magnificat! Ballet Memphis BalletMet Ballet Minnesota Ballet Nouveau Colorado Ballet Quad Cities Ballet San Jose Ballet Theatre of Maryland Les Ballets Trockadero de Monte Carlo Ballet West Ballez Bay Area Houston Ballet and Theatre Bay Pointe Ballet Boston Ballet California Riverside Ballet Carolina Ballet Cedar Lake Charlotte Ballet Chicago Ballet Chicago Festival Ballet Cincinnati Ballet Cleveland Ballet Colorado Ballet Complexions Concert Ballet of Virginia Dance Theatre of Harlem Dayton Ballet Eugene Ballet Folsom Lake Civic Ballet Greensboro Ballet Gwinnett Ballet Theatre Houston Ballet James Sewell Ballet Joffrey Ballet Kansas City Ballet Los Angeles Ballet Louisville Ballet Miami City Ballet Morphoses Mystic Ballet National Ballet Theater of Puerto Rico New Jersey Ballet New York City Ballet Oklahoma City Ballet Oregon Ballet Theatre Pacific Northwest Ballet Pennsylvania Ballet Pittsburgh Ballet San Francisco Ballet Sarasota Ballet Suzanne Farrell Ballet Texas Ballet Theater Tulsa Ballet The Washington Ballet Contemporary Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater AXIS Dance Company Ballet Deviare Ballet Hispanico Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company Dayton Contemporary Dance Company Dominic Walsh Hubbard Street Lar Lubovitch Martha Graham Momix Paul Taylor The Philadelphia Dance Company Pilobolus Ririe-Woodbury sjDANCEco Urban Bush Women Whim W'Him Other Chicago Dance Crash Ensemble Español Spanish Dance Theater Ice Theatre of New York The LXD The Rockettes v t e Ballet companies Africa Cairo Opera Ballet Company Cape Town City Ballet Asia Ballet Manila Ballet Philippines Guangzhou Ballet Gwangju City Ballet Hong Kong Ballet Iranian National Ballet Company Israel Ballet K-ballet Korea National Ballet National Ballet of China New National Theatre Tokyo Philippine Ballet Theatre Seoul Ballet Theatre Shanghai Ballet Company Singapore Dance Theatre State Ballet of Georgia Tokyo Ballet Universal Ballet Europe Ballet Cymru Ballet Ireland Ballet Romand Ballet Zürich Les Ballets Persans Ballets Russes Barcelona Ballet Bayerisches Staatsballett Béjart Ballet Berlin State Ballet Birmingham Royal Ballet Bolshoi Ballet Cork City Ballet Royal Danish Ballet Donetsk Ballet Dutch National Ballet Eifman Ballet English National Ballet Finnish National Ballet Sukhishvili Georgian National Ballet Greek National Opera Hamburg Ballet Hungarian National Ballet Kyiv Ballet La Scala Theatre Ballet Mariinsky Ballet Mikhailovsky Theatre Ballet National Opera and Ballet Theatre of Moldova The Monte-Carlo Ballet National Opera and Ballet of Bulgaria Northern Ballet Norwegian National Opera and Ballet Novosibirsk Theatre Ballet Original Ballet Russe Paris Opera Ballet Perm Theatre Ballet Polish National Ballet National Ballet of Portugal The Royal Ballet Rambert Dance Company Russian State Ballet of Siberia Saint Petersburg Ballet Theatre Scottish Ballet Spanish National Dance Company Stanislavski Ballet Stuttgart Ballet Royal Swedish Ballet Théâtre du Silence Turkish State Opera and Ballet Vienna State Ballet North America Alabama Ballet Alberta Ballet Company Alexandra Ballet Alonzo King LINES Ballet American Ballet Theatre American Midwest Ballet American Repertory Ballet Anaheim Ballet Aspen Santa Fe Ballet Atlanta Ballet Atlanta Festival Ballet Ballet Arizona Ballet Austin Ballet BC Ballet Des Moines Ballet Fantastique Ballet Hispanico Ballet Magnificat! Ballet Memphis BalletMet Ballet Minnesota Ballet Nouveau Colorado Ballet Quad Cities Ballet San Jose Ballet Theatre of Maryland Les Ballets Trockadero de Monte Carlo Ballet West Ballez Bay Pointe Ballet Boston Ballet Les Grands Ballets Canadiens California Riverside Ballet Carolina Ballet Charlotte Ballet Chicago Ballet Chicago Festival Ballet Cincinnati Ballet Cleveland Ballet (1935 · 1972 · 2014) Colorado Ballet Complexions Contemporary Ballet Cuban National Ballet Dance Theatre of Harlem Dayton Ballet Greensboro Ballet Houston Ballet Joffrey Ballet Kansas City Ballet Los Angeles Ballet Louisville Ballet Moscow Ballet (United States) National Ballet of Canada National Ballet Theater of Puerto Rico New Jersey Ballet New York City Ballet Oklahoma City Ballet Oregon Ballet Theatre Pacific Northwest Ballet Pennsylvania Ballet Pittsburgh Ballet Royal Winnipeg Ballet San Francisco Ballet The Washington Ballet Tulsa Ballet Oceania The Australian Ballet Ballet Theatre of Queensland Queensland Ballet Melbourne City Ballet Royal New Zealand Ballet West Australian Ballet South America Ballet Municipal de Lima Chilean National Ballet Colon Theater Ballet National Ballet of Uruguay Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) ISNI 1 VIAF 1 WorldCat National libraries Norway France (data) United States Australia Scientific databases CiNii (Japan) Other Social Networks and Archival Context SUDOC (France) 1 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_York_City_Ballet&oldid=1056811805" Categories: New York City Ballet 1948 establishments in New York (state) Performing groups established in 1948 Dance in the United States Lincoln Center History of ballet Dance companies in New York City Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with CINII identifiers Articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Articles with WORLDCATID identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? ??????? Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Polski Român? ??????? Suomi Svenska ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 18:06 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement