https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northern_palm_squirrel Northern palm squirrel - Wikipedia Northern palm squirrel From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Species of rodent Northern palm squirrel At Keoladeo National Park, Bharatpur, Rajasthan, India Conservation status Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1] Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Rodentia Family: Sciuridae Genus: Funambulus Subgenus: Prasadsciurus Moore & Tate, 1965[3] Species: F. pennantii Binomial name Funambulus pennantii Wroughton, 1905[2] Subspecies[4] F. p. pennantii F. p. argentescens A five-striped palm squirrel refuses to leave her dead baby. She carried it in her mouth near Deva village in Anand, Gujarat. The northern palm squirrel (Funambulus pennantii) also called the five-striped palm squirrel is a species of rodent in the family Sciuridae.[5] Some authorities recognize two subspecies, F. p. pennantii and F. p. argentescens. It is a semi-arboreal species found in tropical and subtropical dry deciduous forests and many other rural and urban habitats. It is a common species with a wide range. The International Union for Conservation of Nature has rated its conservation status as being of "least concern". Contents 1 Distribution 2 Habitat 3 Status 4 References Distribution[edit] It is found in the Andaman Islands, Nicobar Islands (where it was introduced), India, Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan and Iran. It is fairly common animal in India that can be found, in urban areas, even in large cities such as Delhi and Kolkata. Two subspecies, Funambulus pennantii argentescens and Funambulus pennantii lutescens, were suggested by Wroughton in addition to the nominate race; however, more recent workers do not make this distinction. Thorington and Hoffman in Wilson and Reeder (2005) listed only two subspecies: F. p. pennantii and F. p. argentescens.[4] However, Ghose, et al. (2004), described two additional subspecies: F. p. chhattisgarhi (distribution: eastern part of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, West Bengal, and Bihar) and F. p. gangutrianus (distribution: West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, and Nepal),[6] but Talmale (2007) treated the Maharashtra populations as F. p. pennantii only due to the overlapping in measurements and color variations observed in the specimens.[7][8][9] It has also been introduced to Australia where it can be found in Perth, Western Australia, which was established from zoo escapees of the species,[10] and a population recorded around Mosman, New South Wales and near Taronga Zoo that may have become extinct. The feral populace, known locally as the five-lined palm squirrel, ranges out to the suburbs surrounding the Perth Zoo and also inhabits the grounds. They give birth over a period from August to May and most intensively around the austral spring and autumn.[11] In India, the southern boundary of the species' range is not clearly identified, and recent records suggest it may extend as far as Madanapalli. The southern boundary on the Western Ghats side clearly extends to localities including Dharwar and Mysore, in Karnataka.[12][13] Habitat[edit] The northern palm squirrel is a very adaptable species. It occurs in tropical and subtropical dry deciduous forest, montane forests to altitudes of 4,000 m (13,123 ft), scrublands, plantations, grasslands, arable land, rural gardens and urban areas.[1] Status[edit] The northern palm squirrel is a common species throughout most of its wide range. It is an adaptable species and no particular threats have been identified, and the International Union for Conservation of Nature has rated its conservation status as being of "least concern".[1] References[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Funambulus pennantii. Wikispecies has information related to Funambulus pennantii. ^ a b c Nameer, P.O.; Molur, S. (2017) [errata version of 2016 assessment]. "Funambulus pennantii". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. 2016: e.T8702A115088099. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2016-3.RLTS.T8702A22259750.en. Retrieved 23 November 2021. ^ Wroughton, R.C. (1905). "The common striped palm squirrel". Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society. 16: 406–413. ^ Moore, J.C.; Tate, G.H.H. (1965). "A study of the diurnal squirrels, Sciurinae, of the Indian and Indo-Chinese subregions". Fieldiana Zoology. 48: 1–351. doi:10.5962/bhl.title.2919. ^ a b Thorington, R.W., Jr.; Hoffmann, R.S. (2005). "Family Sciuridae". In Wilson, D.E.; Reeder, D.M (eds.). Mammal Species of the World: a taxonomic and geographic reference (3rd ed.). The Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 754–818. ISBN 0-8018-8221-4. OCLC 26158608. ^ Thorington, R. W. Jr; R. S. Hoffman (2005). "Family Sciuridae". In Wilson, D. E.; Reeder, D. M. (eds.). Mammal Species of the World a Taxonomic and Geographic Reference. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. pp. 754–818. ^ Ghose, R. K.; Mandal, A. K.; Ghose, P. S. (2004). "A contribution to the taxonomy of Indian five striped squirrel (Funambulus pennant, Wroughton), with a description of two new subspecies" (PDF). Records of the Zoological Survey of India. 102 (3–4): 89–103. ^ Talmale, S.S. (2007). Studies on Small Mammal Diversity in Maharashtra State. PhD. A thesis submitted to the University of Pune, Maharashtra State, India. ^ Ellerman, J.R. (1961). The fauna of India including Pakistan, Burma, and Ceylon: Mammalia, Rodentia. Zoological Survey of India, Calcutta. ^ Srinivasulu C.; S. Chakraborty; M.S. Pradhan (2004). "Checklist of the Sciurids (Mammalia: Rodentia: Sciuridae)". Zoos' Print Journal. 19 (2): 1351–1360. doi:10.11609/jott.zpj.19.2.1351-60. ^ Long, J. L. (2003). Introduced Mammals of the World: Their History, Distribution, and Influence. Csiro Publishing, Collingwood, Australia. ISBN 9780643099166 ^ Menkhorst, P.W.; Knight, F. (2011). A field guide to the mammals of Australia (3rd ed.). Melbourne: Oxford University Press. p. 210. ISBN 9780195573954. ^ Pradhan, M.S. and Kurup, G.U. (2001). Mammalia IN Fauna of Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve. Fauna of conservation Area Series 11. Publ: Director, Zoological Survey of India, Kolkata: 311–330. ^ Santharam, V. (2007). "Five-striped Palm Squirrel (Funambulus pennantii) in Rishi Valley, Chittoor district, Andhra Pradesh". Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society. 104 (2): 202–203. v t e Extant species of family Sciuridae (subfamily Callosciurinae) Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Rodentia Suborder: Sciuromorpha Callosciurus Ear-spot squirrel (Callosciurus adamsi) Kloss's squirrel (Callosciurus albescens) Kinabalu squirrel (Callosciurus baluensis) Grey-bellied squirrel (Callosciurus caniceps) Pallas's squirrel (Callosciurus erythraeus) Finlayson's squirrel (Callosciurus finlaysonii) Inornate squirrel (Callosciurus inornatus) Mentawai squirrel (Callosciurus melanogaster) Black-striped squirrel (Callosciurus nigrovittatus) Plantain squirrel (Callosciurus notatus) Borneo black-banded squirrel (Callosciurus orestes) Phayre's squirrel (Callosciurus phayrei) Prevost's squirrel (Callosciurus prevostii) Irrawaddy squirrel (Callosciurus pygerythrus) Anderson's squirrel (Callosciurus quinquestriatus) Dremomys (Red-cheeked squirrels) Bornean mountain ground squirrel (Dremomys everetti) Red-throated squirrel (Dremomys gularis) Orange-bellied Himalayan squirrel (Dremomys lokriah) Perny's long-nosed squirrel (Dremomys pernyi) Red-hipped squirrel (Dremomys pyrrhomerus) Asian red-cheeked squirrel (Dremomys rufigenis) Exilisciurus Philippine pygmy squirrel (Exilisciurus concinnus) Least pygmy squirrel (Exilisciurus exilis) Tufted pygmy squirrel (Exilisciurus whiteheadi) Glyphotes Sculptor squirrel (Glyphotes simus) Hyosciurus Montane long-nosed squirrel (Hyosciurus heinrichi) Lowland long-nosed squirrel (Hyosciurus ileile) Lariscus (striped ground squirrels) Four-striped ground squirrel (Lariscus hosei) Three-striped ground squirrel (Lariscus insignis) Niobe ground squirrel (Lariscus niobe) Mentawai three-striped squirrel (Lariscus obscurus) Menetes Berdmore's ground squirrel (Menetes berdmorei) Nannosciurus Black-eared squirrel (Nannosciurus melanotis) Prosciurillus Secretive dwarf squirrel (Prosciurillus abstrusus) Whitish dwarf squirrel (Prosciurillus leucomus) Celebes dwarf squirrel (Prosciurillus murinus) Sanghir squirrel (Prosciurillus rosenbergii) Weber's dwarf squirrel (Prosciurillus weberi) Rhinosciurus Shrew-faced squirrel (Rhinosciurus laticaudatus) Rubrisciurus Red-bellied squirrel (Rubrisciurus rubriventer) Sundasciurus Subgenus Aletesciurus: Davao squirrel (Sundasciurus davensis) Horse-tailed squirrel (Sundasciurus hippurus) Northern Palawan tree squirrel (Sundasciurus juvencus) Mindanao squirrel (Sundasciurus mindanensis) Culion tree squirrel (Sundasciurus moellendorffi) Philippine tree squirrel (Sundasciurus philippinensis) Palawan montane squirrel (Sundasciurus rabori) Samar squirrel (Sundasciurus samarensis) Southern Palawan tree squirrel (Sundasciurus steerii) Subgenus Sundasciurus: Brooke's squirrel (Sundasciurus brookei) Fraternal squirrel (Sundasciurus fraterculus) Jentink's squirrel (Sundasciurus jentinki) Low's squirrel (Sundasciurus lowii) Slender squirrel (Sundasciurus tenuis) Tamiops (Asiatic striped squirrels) Himalayan striped squirrel (Tamiops mcclellandii) Maritime striped squirrel (Tamiops maritimus) Cambodian striped squirrel (Tamiops rodolphii) Swinhoe's striped squirrel (Tamiops swinhoei) Funambulus Subgenus Funambulus: Layard's palm squirrel (Funambulus layardi) Indian palm squirrel (Funambulus palmarum) Nilgiri palm squirrel (Funambulus sublineatus) Dusky palm squirrel (Funambulus obscurus) Jungle palm squirrel (Funambulus tristriatus) Subgenus Prasadsciurus: Northern palm squirrel (Funambulus pennantii) Category Taxon identifiers Wikidata: Q1765033 Wikispecies: Funambulus pennantii ADW: Funambulus_pennantii AFD: Funambulus_pennantii ARKive: funambulus-pennantii EoL: 313086 EPPO: FUNAPE GBIF: 2437243 iNaturalist: 45936 IRMNG: 11076956 ITIS: 632353 IUCN: 8702 MSW: 12400576 NCBI: 64681 uBio: 5488326 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Northern_palm_squirrel&oldid=1056795097" Categories: IUCN Red List least concern species Funambulus Rodents of Asia Rodents of Oceania Rodents of Australia Rodents of India Rodents of Pakistan Rodents of Papua New Guinea Fauna of Iran Mammals of Bangladesh Mammals of Fiji Mammals of Nepal Mammals of Samoa Mammals of Tonga Mammals described in 1905 Taxa named by Robert Charles Wroughton Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Commons link is on Wikidata Taxonomy articles created by Polbot Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Languages ????? ????????? Català Cebuano Deutsch Español Euskara ????? Français ??? ??????? ?????? ????? Magyar Nederlands ?????? Polski ??????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t Winaray Edit links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 16:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northern_palm_squirrel Northern palm squirrel - Wikipedia Northern palm squirrel From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Species of rodent Northern palm squirrel At Keoladeo National Park, Bharatpur, Rajasthan, India Conservation status Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1] Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Rodentia Family: Sciuridae Genus: Funambulus Subgenus: Prasadsciurus Moore & Tate, 1965[3] Species: F. pennantii Binomial name Funambulus pennantii Wroughton, 1905[2] Subspecies[4] F. p. pennantii F. p. argentescens A five-striped palm squirrel refuses to leave her dead baby. She carried it in her mouth near Deva village in Anand, Gujarat. The northern palm squirrel (Funambulus pennantii) also called the five-striped palm squirrel is a species of rodent in the family Sciuridae.[5] Some authorities recognize two subspecies, F. p. pennantii and F. p. argentescens. It is a semi-arboreal species found in tropical and subtropical dry deciduous forests and many other rural and urban habitats. It is a common species with a wide range. The International Union for Conservation of Nature has rated its conservation status as being of "least concern". Contents 1 Distribution 2 Habitat 3 Status 4 References Distribution[edit] It is found in the Andaman Islands, Nicobar Islands (where it was introduced), India, Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan and Iran. It is fairly common animal in India that can be found, in urban areas, even in large cities such as Delhi and Kolkata. Two subspecies, Funambulus pennantii argentescens and Funambulus pennantii lutescens, were suggested by Wroughton in addition to the nominate race; however, more recent workers do not make this distinction. Thorington and Hoffman in Wilson and Reeder (2005) listed only two subspecies: F. p. pennantii and F. p. argentescens.[4] However, Ghose, et al. (2004), described two additional subspecies: F. p. chhattisgarhi (distribution: eastern part of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, West Bengal, and Bihar) and F. p. gangutrianus (distribution: West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, and Nepal),[6] but Talmale (2007) treated the Maharashtra populations as F. p. pennantii only due to the overlapping in measurements and color variations observed in the specimens.[7][8][9] It has also been introduced to Australia where it can be found in Perth, Western Australia, which was established from zoo escapees of the species,[10] and a population recorded around Mosman, New South Wales and near Taronga Zoo that may have become extinct. The feral populace, known locally as the five-lined palm squirrel, ranges out to the suburbs surrounding the Perth Zoo and also inhabits the grounds. They give birth over a period from August to May and most intensively around the austral spring and autumn.[11] In India, the southern boundary of the species' range is not clearly identified, and recent records suggest it may extend as far as Madanapalli. The southern boundary on the Western Ghats side clearly extends to localities including Dharwar and Mysore, in Karnataka.[12][13] Habitat[edit] The northern palm squirrel is a very adaptable species. It occurs in tropical and subtropical dry deciduous forest, montane forests to altitudes of 4,000 m (13,123 ft), scrublands, plantations, grasslands, arable land, rural gardens and urban areas.[1] Status[edit] The northern palm squirrel is a common species throughout most of its wide range. It is an adaptable species and no particular threats have been identified, and the International Union for Conservation of Nature has rated its conservation status as being of "least concern".[1] References[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Funambulus pennantii. Wikispecies has information related to Funambulus pennantii. ^ a b c Nameer, P.O.; Molur, S. (2017) [errata version of 2016 assessment]. "Funambulus pennantii". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. 2016: e.T8702A115088099. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2016-3.RLTS.T8702A22259750.en. Retrieved 23 November 2021. ^ Wroughton, R.C. (1905). "The common striped palm squirrel". Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society. 16: 406–413. ^ Moore, J.C.; Tate, G.H.H. (1965). "A study of the diurnal squirrels, Sciurinae, of the Indian and Indo-Chinese subregions". Fieldiana Zoology. 48: 1–351. doi:10.5962/bhl.title.2919. ^ a b Thorington, R.W., Jr.; Hoffmann, R.S. (2005). "Family Sciuridae". In Wilson, D.E.; Reeder, D.M (eds.). Mammal Species of the World: a taxonomic and geographic reference (3rd ed.). The Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 754–818. ISBN 0-8018-8221-4. OCLC 26158608. ^ Thorington, R. W. Jr; R. S. Hoffman (2005). "Family Sciuridae". In Wilson, D. E.; Reeder, D. M. (eds.). Mammal Species of the World a Taxonomic and Geographic Reference. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. pp. 754–818. ^ Ghose, R. K.; Mandal, A. K.; Ghose, P. S. (2004). "A contribution to the taxonomy of Indian five striped squirrel (Funambulus pennant, Wroughton), with a description of two new subspecies" (PDF). Records of the Zoological Survey of India. 102 (3–4): 89–103. ^ Talmale, S.S. (2007). Studies on Small Mammal Diversity in Maharashtra State. PhD. A thesis submitted to the University of Pune, Maharashtra State, India. ^ Ellerman, J.R. (1961). The fauna of India including Pakistan, Burma, and Ceylon: Mammalia, Rodentia. Zoological Survey of India, Calcutta. ^ Srinivasulu C.; S. Chakraborty; M.S. Pradhan (2004). "Checklist of the Sciurids (Mammalia: Rodentia: Sciuridae)". Zoos' Print Journal. 19 (2): 1351–1360. doi:10.11609/jott.zpj.19.2.1351-60. ^ Long, J. L. (2003). Introduced Mammals of the World: Their History, Distribution, and Influence. Csiro Publishing, Collingwood, Australia. ISBN 9780643099166 ^ Menkhorst, P.W.; Knight, F. (2011). A field guide to the mammals of Australia (3rd ed.). Melbourne: Oxford University Press. p. 210. ISBN 9780195573954. ^ Pradhan, M.S. and Kurup, G.U. (2001). Mammalia IN Fauna of Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve. Fauna of conservation Area Series 11. Publ: Director, Zoological Survey of India, Kolkata: 311–330. ^ Santharam, V. (2007). "Five-striped Palm Squirrel (Funambulus pennantii) in Rishi Valley, Chittoor district, Andhra Pradesh". Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society. 104 (2): 202–203. v t e Extant species of family Sciuridae (subfamily Callosciurinae) Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Rodentia Suborder: Sciuromorpha Callosciurus Ear-spot squirrel (Callosciurus adamsi) Kloss's squirrel (Callosciurus albescens) Kinabalu squirrel (Callosciurus baluensis) Grey-bellied squirrel (Callosciurus caniceps) Pallas's squirrel (Callosciurus erythraeus) Finlayson's squirrel (Callosciurus finlaysonii) Inornate squirrel (Callosciurus inornatus) Mentawai squirrel (Callosciurus melanogaster) Black-striped squirrel (Callosciurus nigrovittatus) Plantain squirrel (Callosciurus notatus) Borneo black-banded squirrel (Callosciurus orestes) Phayre's squirrel (Callosciurus phayrei) Prevost's squirrel (Callosciurus prevostii) Irrawaddy squirrel (Callosciurus pygerythrus) Anderson's squirrel (Callosciurus quinquestriatus) Dremomys (Red-cheeked squirrels) Bornean mountain ground squirrel (Dremomys everetti) Red-throated squirrel (Dremomys gularis) Orange-bellied Himalayan squirrel (Dremomys lokriah) Perny's long-nosed squirrel (Dremomys pernyi) Red-hipped squirrel (Dremomys pyrrhomerus) Asian red-cheeked squirrel (Dremomys rufigenis) Exilisciurus Philippine pygmy squirrel (Exilisciurus concinnus) Least pygmy squirrel (Exilisciurus exilis) Tufted pygmy squirrel (Exilisciurus whiteheadi) Glyphotes Sculptor squirrel (Glyphotes simus) Hyosciurus Montane long-nosed squirrel (Hyosciurus heinrichi) Lowland long-nosed squirrel (Hyosciurus ileile) Lariscus (striped ground squirrels) Four-striped ground squirrel (Lariscus hosei) Three-striped ground squirrel (Lariscus insignis) Niobe ground squirrel (Lariscus niobe) Mentawai three-striped squirrel (Lariscus obscurus) Menetes Berdmore's ground squirrel (Menetes berdmorei) Nannosciurus Black-eared squirrel (Nannosciurus melanotis) Prosciurillus Secretive dwarf squirrel (Prosciurillus abstrusus) Whitish dwarf squirrel (Prosciurillus leucomus) Celebes dwarf squirrel (Prosciurillus murinus) Sanghir squirrel (Prosciurillus rosenbergii) Weber's dwarf squirrel (Prosciurillus weberi) Rhinosciurus Shrew-faced squirrel (Rhinosciurus laticaudatus) Rubrisciurus Red-bellied squirrel (Rubrisciurus rubriventer) Sundasciurus Subgenus Aletesciurus: Davao squirrel (Sundasciurus davensis) Horse-tailed squirrel (Sundasciurus hippurus) Northern Palawan tree squirrel (Sundasciurus juvencus) Mindanao squirrel (Sundasciurus mindanensis) Culion tree squirrel (Sundasciurus moellendorffi) Philippine tree squirrel (Sundasciurus philippinensis) Palawan montane squirrel (Sundasciurus rabori) Samar squirrel (Sundasciurus samarensis) Southern Palawan tree squirrel (Sundasciurus steerii) Subgenus Sundasciurus: Brooke's squirrel (Sundasciurus brookei) Fraternal squirrel (Sundasciurus fraterculus) Jentink's squirrel (Sundasciurus jentinki) Low's squirrel (Sundasciurus lowii) Slender squirrel (Sundasciurus tenuis) Tamiops (Asiatic striped squirrels) Himalayan striped squirrel (Tamiops mcclellandii) Maritime striped squirrel (Tamiops maritimus) Cambodian striped squirrel (Tamiops rodolphii) Swinhoe's striped squirrel (Tamiops swinhoei) Funambulus Subgenus Funambulus: Layard's palm squirrel (Funambulus layardi) Indian palm squirrel (Funambulus palmarum) Nilgiri palm squirrel (Funambulus sublineatus) Dusky palm squirrel (Funambulus obscurus) Jungle palm squirrel (Funambulus tristriatus) Subgenus Prasadsciurus: Northern palm squirrel (Funambulus pennantii) Category Taxon identifiers Wikidata: Q1765033 Wikispecies: Funambulus pennantii ADW: Funambulus_pennantii AFD: Funambulus_pennantii ARKive: funambulus-pennantii EoL: 313086 EPPO: FUNAPE GBIF: 2437243 iNaturalist: 45936 IRMNG: 11076956 ITIS: 632353 IUCN: 8702 MSW: 12400576 NCBI: 64681 uBio: 5488326 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Northern_palm_squirrel&oldid=1056795097" Categories: IUCN Red List least concern species Funambulus Rodents of Asia Rodents of Oceania Rodents of Australia Rodents of India Rodents of Pakistan Rodents of Papua New Guinea Fauna of Iran Mammals of Bangladesh Mammals of Fiji Mammals of Nepal Mammals of Samoa Mammals of Tonga Mammals described in 1905 Taxa named by Robert Charles Wroughton Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Commons link is on Wikidata Taxonomy articles created by Polbot Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Languages ????? ????????? Català Cebuano Deutsch Español Euskara ????? Français ??? ??????? ?????? ????? Magyar Nederlands ?????? Polski ??????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska Ti?ng Vi?t Winaray Edit links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 16:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement