https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pope_Innocent_III Pope Innocent III - Wikipedia Pope Innocent III From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Not to be confused with Antipope Innocent III. Head of the Catholic Church from 1198 to 1216 Pope Innocent III Bishop of Rome Detail of a fresco at the cloister Sacro Speco, c.?1219 Diocese Diocese of Rome See Holy See Papacy began 8 January 1198 Papacy ended 16 July 1216 Predecessor Celestine III Successor Honorius III Orders Ordination 21 February 1198 Consecration 22 February 1198 by Ottaviano di Paoli Created cardinal September 1190 by Clement III Personal details Birth name Lotario de' Conti di Segni Born 1160 or 1161 Gavignano, Papal States Died 16 July 1216 (aged 55–56) Perugia, Papal States Nationality Italian Denomination Roman Catholic Parents Count Trasimund of Segni and Claricia Scotti Previous post(s) Cardinal-Deacon of St. George in Velabro and Sts. Sergius and Bacchus (1190–1191) Cardinal-Priest of St. Pudentiana (1191–1198) Ordination history History Episcopal consecration Consecrated by Ottaviano di Paoli Date 22 February 1198 Place Rome Cardinalate Elevated by Pope Clement III Date September 1190 Episcopal succession Bishops consecrated by Pope Innocent III as principal consecrator Raynald of Nocera March 1198 Adhémar de Peirat 7 April 1198 John of Leighlin 18 September 1198 Mauger of Worcester 4 June 1200 Albert Longhi 22 June 1203 Malachias of Lismore 5 November 1203 Tommaso Morsini 27 March 1205 Peter des Roches 25 September 1205 Albrecht de Kevenburg 24 December 1206 Guillaume Amanevi 1207 Antelm of Patrae Veteres 29 April 1207 Stephen Langton 17 June 1207 Gérard de Cros 1209 Andrea de Celano 1214 Filippo of Troia October 1214 Christian to the Prussians 1215 Bonfigli of Siena 10 April 1216 Silvester of Evesham 3 July 1216 Other popes named Innocent Papal styles of Pope Innocent III Reference style His Holiness Spoken style Your Holiness Religious style Holy Father Pope Innocent III (Latin: Innocentius III; 1160 or 1161 – 16 July 1216,[1] born Lotario dei Conti di Segni (anglicized as Lothar of Segni) was the head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 8 January 1198 to his death. Pope Innocent was one of the most powerful and influential of the medieval popes. He exerted a wide influence over the Christian states of Europe, claiming supremacy over all of Europe's kings. He was central in supporting the Catholic Church's reforms of ecclesiastical affairs through his decretals and the Fourth Lateran Council. This resulted in a considerable refinement of Western canon law. He is furthermore notable for using interdict and other censures to compel princes to obey his decisions, although these measures were not uniformly successful. Innocent greatly extended the scope of the Crusades, directing crusades against Muslim Iberia and the Holy Land as well as the Albigensian Crusade against the Cathars in southern France. He organized the Fourth Crusade of 1202–1204, which ended in the sack of Constantinople. Although the attack on Constantinople went against his explicit orders, and the Crusaders were subsequently excommunicated, Innocent reluctantly accepted this result, seeing it as the will of God to reunite the Latin and Eastern Orthodox Churches. In the event, the sack of Constantinople and the subsequent period of Frankokratia heightened the hostility between the Latin and Greek churches. (The Byzantine Empire was restored in 1261 but never regained its former strength, finally falling in 1453.[2]) Contents 1 Biography 1.1 Early life 1.2 Election to the papacy 1.3 Reassertion of papal power 1.4 Involvement in Imperial elections 1.5 Feudal power over Europe 1.6 Crusades and suppression of heresy 1.7 Francis of Assisi 1.8 Other religious orders 1.9 Fourth Council of the Lateran 1.10 Death and legacy 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Biography[edit] Early life[edit] Lotario de' Conti was born in Gavignano, Italy, near Anagni.[3] His father Count Trasimondo of Segni was a member of a famous house, the Conti di Segni (Counts of Segni), which produced nine popes including Gregory IX, Alexander IV and Innocent XIII. Lotario was the nephew of Pope Clement III; his mother, Clarissa Scotti (Romani de Scotti), was from the same noble Roman family.[4] Lotario received his early education in Rome, probably at the Benedictine abbey of St Andrea al Celio, under Peter Ismael;[5] he studied theology in Paris under the theologians Peter of Poitiers, Melior of Pisa, and Peter of Corbeil,[6] and (possibly) jurisprudence in Bologna, according to the Gesta (between 1187 and 1189).[7] As pope, Lotario was to play a major role in the shaping of canon law through conciliar canons and decretal letters.[3] Shortly after the death of Alexander III (30 August 1181) Lotario returned to Rome and held various ecclesiastical offices during the short reigns of Lucius III, Urban III, Gregory VIII, and Clement III, being ordained a Subdeacon by Gregory VIII and reaching the rank of Cardinal-Priest under Clement III in 1191. As a cardinal, Lotario wrote De miseria humanae conditionis (On the Misery of the Human Condition).[8][9] The work was very popular for centuries, surviving in more than 700 manuscripts.[10] Although he never returned to the complementary work he intended to write, On the Dignity of Human Nature, Bartolomeo Facio (1400–1457) took up the task writing De excellentia ac praestantia hominis.[11] Election to the papacy[edit] Main article: 1198 papal election Arms of Innocent III at Santo Spirito in Sassia, Rome Celestine III died on 8 January 1198. Before his death he had urged the College of Cardinals to elect Giovanni di San Paolo as his successor, but Lotario de' Conti was elected pope in the ruins of the ancient Septizodium, near the Circus Maximus in Rome after only two ballots on the very day on which Celestine III died. He was only thirty-seven years old at the time.[3] He took the name Innocent III, maybe as a reference to his predecessor Innocent II (1130–1143), who had succeeded in asserting the papacy's authority over the emperor (in contrast with Celestine III's recent policy).[12] Reassertion of papal power[edit] Bulla of Innocent III As pope, Innocent III began with a very wide sense of his responsibility and of his authority. During Innocent III's reign, the papacy was at the height of its powers. He was considered to be the most powerful person in Europe at the time.[13] In 1198, Innocent wrote to the prefect Acerbius and the nobles of Tuscany expressing his support of the medieval political theory of the sun and the moon.[14] His papacy asserted the absolute spiritual authority of his office, while still respecting the temporal authority of kings.[15] There was scarcely a country in Europe over which Innocent III did not in some way or other assert the supremacy which he claimed for the papacy. He excommunicated Alfonso IX of Leon, for marrying a near relative, Berengaria, a daughter of Alfonso VIII, contrary to the laws of the Church, and effected their separation in 1204. For similar reasons he annulled, in 1208, the marriage of the crown-prince, Alfonso of Portugal, with Urraca, daughter of Alfonso of Castile. From Pedro II of Aragon he received that kingdom in vassalage and crowned him king at Rome in 1204.[16] The Muslim recapture of Jerusalem in 1187 was to him a divine judgment on the moral lapses of Christian princes. He was also determined to protect what he called "the liberty of the Church" from inroads by secular princes. This determination meant, among other things, that princes should not be involved in the selection of bishops, and it was focused especially on the "patrimonium" of the papacy, the section of central Italy claimed by the popes and later called the Papal States. The patrimonium was routinely threatened by Hohenstaufen German kings who, as Roman emperors, claimed it for themselves. Emperor Henry VI expected his infant son Frederick to bring Germany, Italy, and Sicily under a single ruler, which would leave the Papal States exceedingly vulnerable.[3] Henry's early death left his 3-year-old son, Frederick, as king of Sicily. Henry VI's widow, Constance of Sicily, ruled over Sicily for her young son before he reached the age of majority. She was as eager to remove German power from the kingdom of Sicily as was Innocent III. Before her death in 1198, she named Innocent as guardian of the young Frederick until he reached his maturity. In exchange, Innocent was also able to recover papal rights in Sicily that had been surrendered decades earlier to King William I of Sicily by Pope Adrian IV. The Pope invested the young Frederick II as King of Sicily in November 1198. He also later induced Frederick II to marry Constance of Aragon, the widow of King Emeric of Hungary, in 1209.[3] Involvement in Imperial elections[edit] Innocent was concerned that the marriage of Henry VI and Constance of Sicily gave the Hohenstaufens a claim to all the Italian peninsula with the exception of the Papal States, which would be surrounded by Imperial territory.[15] After the death of Emperor Henry VI, who had recently also conquered the Kingdom of Sicily, the succession became disputed: as Henry's son Frederick was still a small child, the partisans of the Staufen dynasty elected Henry's brother, Philip, Duke of Swabia, king in March 1198, whereas the princes opposed to the Staufen dynasty elected Otto, Duke of Brunswick, of the House of Welf. King Philip II of France supported Philip's claim, whereas King Richard I of England supported his nephew Otto.[17] In 1201, the pope openly espoused the side of Otto IV, whose family had always been opposed to the house of Hohenstaufen.[18] It is the business of the pope to look after the interests of the Roman empire, since the empire derives its origin and its final authority from the papacy; its origin, because it was originally transferred from Greece by and for the sake of the papacy; ... its final authority, because the emperor is raised to his position by the pope who blesses him, crowns him and invests him with the empire. ...Therefore, since three persons have lately been elected king by different parties, namely the youth [Frederick, son of Henry VI], Philip [of Hohenstaufen, brother of Henry VI], and Otto [of Brunswick, of the Welf family], so also three things must be taken into account in regard to each one, namely: the legality, the suitability and the expediency of his election. ...Far be it from us that we should defer to man rather than to God, or that we should fear the countenance of the powerful. ...On the foregoing grounds, then, we decide that the youth should not at present be given the empire; we utterly reject Philip for his manifest unfitness and we order his usurpation to be resisted by all ... since Otto is not only himself devoted to the church, but comes from devout ancestors on both sides, ... therefore we decree that he ought to be accepted and supported as king, and ought to be given the crown of empire, after the rights of the Roman church have been secured. "Papal Decree on the choice of a German King, 1201"[19] The confusion in the Empire allowed Innocent to drive out the imperial feudal lords from Ancona, Spoleto and Perugia, who had been installed by Emperor Henry VI.[20] On 3 July 1201, the papal legate, Cardinal-Bishop Guido of Palestrina, announced to the people, in the cathedral of Cologne, that Otto IV had been approved by the pope as Roman king and threatened with excommunication all those who refused to acknowledge him. At the same time, Innocent encouraged the cities in Tuscany to form a league called the League of San Genesio against German imperial interests in Italy, and they placed themselves under Innocent's protection.[20] In May 1202, Innocent issued the decree Venerabilem, addressed to the Duke of Zähringen, in which he explained his thinking on the relation between the papacy and the Empire. This decree was afterwards embodied in the Corpus Juris Canonici and contained the following items: The German princes have the right to elect the king, who is afterwards to become emperor. This right was given them by the Apostolic See when it transferred the imperial dignity from the Greeks to the Germans in the person of Charlemagne. The right to investigate and decide whether a king thus elected is worthy of the imperial dignity belongs to the pope, whose office it is to anoint, consecrate, and crown him; otherwise it might happen that the pope would be obliged to anoint, consecrate, and crown a king who was excommunicated, a heretic, or a pagan. If the pope finds that the king who has been elected by the princes is unworthy of the imperial dignity, the princes must elect a new king or, if they refuse, the pope will confer the imperial dignity upon another king; for the Church stands in need of a patron and defender. In case of a double election the pope must exhort the princes to come to an agreement. If after a due interval they have not reached an agreement they must ask the pope to arbitrate, failing which, he must of his own accord and by virtue of his office decide in favour of one of the claimants. The pope's decision need not be based on the greater or less legality of either election, but on the qualifications of the claimants.[3] Despite papal support, Otto could not oust his rival Philip until the latter was murdered in a private feud. His rule now undisputed, Otto reneged on his earlier promises and set his sights on reestablishing Imperial power in Italy and claiming even the Kingdom of Sicily. Given the papal interest to keep Germany and Sicily apart, Innocent now supported his ward, King Frederick of Sicily, to resist Otto's advances and restore the Staufen dynasty to the Holy Roman Empire. Frederick was duly elected by the Staufen partisans.[21] The conflict was decided by the Battle of Bouvines on 27 July 1214, which pitted Otto, allied to King John of England against Philip II Augustus. Otto was defeated by the French and thereafter lost all influence. He died on 19 May 1218, leaving Frederick II the undisputed emperor. Meanwhile, King John was forced to acknowledge the Pope as his feudal lord and accept Stephen Langton as Archbishop of Canterbury.[22] In his turn, Frederick II would later become a bitter opponent of the papacy once his empire was secure. Feudal power over Europe[edit] Innocent III played further roles in the politics of Norway,[23] France, Sweden, Bulgaria, Spain and England.[22] At the request of England's King John, Pope Innocent III declared the Magna Carta annulled, which resulted in a rebellion by the English barons who rejected the disenfranchisement.[24] Crusades and suppression of heresy[edit] The neutrality of this section is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (September 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Innocent launched the Albigensian Crusade against the Cathars. Pope Innocent III was also a zealous protector of the Catholic faith and a strenuous opponent of heresy. His chief activity was turned against the Albigenses who had become so numerous and aggressive that they were no longer satisfied with just being adherents of heretical doctrines but even endeavoured to spread their heresy by force. They were especially numerous in a few cities of Northern and Southern France. During the first year of his pontificate, Innocent sent the two Cistercian monks Rainer and Guido to the Albigenses in France to preach to them the true doctrines of the Catholic faith and dispute with them on controverted topics of religion. The two Cistercian missionaries were soon followed by Diego, Bishop of Osma, then by Saint Dominic and the two papal legates. Peter of Castelnau and Raoul. When, however, these missionaries were ridiculed and despised by the Albigenses, and the papal legate Castelnau was assassinated in 1208, Innocent resorted to force. He ordered the bishops of Southern France to put under interdict the participants in the murder and all the towns that gave shelter to them. He was especially incensed against Count Raymond of Toulouse who had previously been excommunicated by the murdered legate and whom the pope suspected as the instigator of the murder. The count protested his innocence and submitted to the pope but the pope placed no further trust in him. He called upon the King of France, Philip II to raise an army for the suppression of the Albigenses. Under the leadership of Simon of Montfort a cruel campaign ensued against the Albigenses which, despite the protest of Innocent, soon turned into a war of conquest.[25] The Albigensian Crusade led to the deaths of approximately 20,000 men, women and children, Cathar and Catholic alike, decimating the number of practising Cathars and diminishing the region's distinct culture.[26] The conflict took on a political flavor, directed not only against the heretics, but also the nobility of Toulouse and vassals of the Crown of Aragon, and finally brought the region firmly under the control of the king of France. King Peter II of Aragon, Count of Barcelona, was directly involved in the conflict, and was killed in the course of the Battle of Muret in 1213. The conflict largely ended with the Treaty of Paris of 1229, in which the integration of the Occitan territory in the French crown was agreed upon. Pope Innocent III spent a majority of his tenure as Pope (1198–1216) preparing for a great crusade on the Holy Land. His first attempt was the Fourth Crusade (1202–1204) which he decreed by the papal bull Post miserabile in 1198.[27][28] Unlike past popes, Innocent III displayed interest in leading the crusade himself, rather than simply instigating it and allowing secular leaders to organize the expedition according to their own aspirations.[26] Innocent III's first order of business in preaching the crusade was to send missionaries to every Catholic state to endorse the campaign. He sent Peter of Capua to the kings of France and England with specific instructions to convince them to settle their differences, resulting in a truce of five years between the two nations, beginning in 1199. The intent of the truce was not to allow the two kings to lead the crusade, but rather to free their resources to assist the Crusade. For the army's leadership, Innocent aimed his pleas at the knights and nobles of Europe,[26] succeeding in France, where many lords answered the pope's call, including the army's two eventual leaders, Theobald of Champagne and Boniface, marquis of Montferrat. The pope's calls to action were not received with as much enthusiasm in England or Germany, and the expedition became mainly a French affair.[29] The Fourth Crusade was an expensive endeavor. Innocent III chose to raise funds with a new approach: requiring all clergy to donate one fortieth of their income. This marked the first time a pope ever imposed a direct tax on the clergy. He faced many difficulties in collecting this tax, including corrupt tax collectors and disregard in England. He also sent envoys to King John of England and King Philip of France, who pledged to contribute to the campaign,[citation needed] and John also declared his support for the clerical tax in his kingdom. The crusaders too contributed funds: Innocent declared that those who took the crusader's vow, but could no longer fulfill it, could be released by a contribution of funds. The pope put Archbishop Hubert Walter in charge of collecting these dues.[26][30] At the onset of the crusade, the intended destination was Egypt, as the Christians and Muslims were under a truce at the time.[29] An agreement was made between the French Crusaders and the Venetians. The Venetians would supply vessels and supplies for the crusaders and in return the crusaders would pay 85,000 marks (£200,000).[31] Innocent gave his approval of this agreement under two conditions: a representative of the pope must accompany the crusade, and the attack on any other Christians was strictly forbidden. The French failed to raise sufficient funds for payment of the Venetians. As a result, the Crusaders diverted the crusade to the Christian city of Zara at the will of the Venetians, to subsidize the debt. This diversion was adopted without the consent of Innocent III, who threatened excommunication to any who took part in the attack. A majority of the French ignored the threat and attacked Zara, and were excommunicated by Innocent III, but soon were forgiven so as to continue the crusade. A second diversion then occurred when the crusaders decided to conquer Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire, at the behest of the exiled Byzantine prince Alexios IV. This diversion was taken without any knowledge by Innocent III, and he did not learn of it until after the city had been captured.[32] Innocent III was heavily opposed to the attack on Constantinople and sent many letters warning the crusaders to not sack the city. Innocent III excommunicated the crusaders who attacked Byzantine cities, but was unable to physically halt or overturn their actions. The attack on Constantinople led to the start of the Latin Empire's rule of Constantinople, which lasted for the next sixty years.[33] Francis of Assisi[edit] In 1209, Francis of Assisi led his first eleven followers to Rome to seek permission from Pope Innocent III to found a new religious order which was ultimately granted.[34] Upon entry to Rome, the brothers encountered Bishop Guido of Assisi, who had in his company Giovanni di San Paolo, the Cardinal-Bishop of Sabina. The cardinal, who was the confessor of Pope Innocent III, was immediately sympathetic to Francis and agreed to represent Francis to the pope. Reluctantly, Pope Innocent agreed to meet with Francis and the brothers the next day. After several days, the pope agreed to admit the group informally, adding that when God increased the group in grace and number, they could return for an official admittance. The group was tonsured.[35] This was important in part because it recognized Church authority and protected his followers from possible accusations of heresy, as had happened to the Waldensians decades earlier. Though Pope Innocent initially had his doubts, following a dream in which he saw Francis holding up the Basilica of St. John Lateran (the cathedral of Rome, thus the 'home church' of all Christendom), he decided to endorse Francis's order. This occurred, according to tradition, on 16 April 1210, and constituted the official founding of the Franciscan Order. The group, then the "Lesser Brothers" (Order of Friars Minor also known as the Franciscan Order), preached on the streets and had no possessions. They were centered in Porziuncola and preached first in Umbria, before expanding throughout Italy.[36] Other religious orders[edit] The lesser religious orders which Pope Innocent III approved are the Hospitallers of the Holy Ghost on 23 April 1198, the Trinitarians on 17 December 1198, and the Humiliati, in June, 1201. Fourth Council of the Lateran[edit] On 15 November 1215, Pope Innocent III convened the Fourth Lateran Council which was considered to be the most important Church council of the Middle Ages. By its conclusion, it issued seventy reformatory decrees. Among other things, it encouraged creating schools and holding clergy to a higher standard than the laity. Canon 18 forbade clergymen to participate in the practice of the judicial ordeal, effectively banning its use.[37] In order to define fundamental doctrines, the council reviewed the nature of the Holy Eucharist, the ordered annual confession of sins, and prescribed detailed procedures for the election of bishops. The council also mandated a strict lifestyle for clergy. Canon 68 states: Jews and Muslims shall wear a special dress to enable them to be distinguished from Christians so that no Christian shall come to marry them ignorant of who they are.[38] Canon 69 forbade "that Jews be given preferment in public office since this offers them the pretext to vent their wrath against the Christians."[39] It assumes that Jews blaspheme Christ, and therefore, as it would be "too absurd for a blasphemer of Christ to exercise power over Christians",[40] Jews should not be appointed to public offices. Death and legacy[edit] Innocent III honored by the U.S. House of Representatives The Council had set the beginning of the Fifth Crusade for 1217, under the direct leadership of the Church. After the Council, in the spring of 1216, Innocent moved to northern Italy in an attempt to reconcile the maritime cities of Pisa and Genoa by removing the excommunication cast over Pisa by his predecessor Celestine III and concluding a pact with Genoa.[41] Innocent III, however, died suddenly at Perugia[3] on 16 June 1216. He was buried in the cathedral of Perugia, where his body remained until Pope Leo XIII had it transferred to the Lateran in December 1891.[3] After his death, Innocent III was believed to be in purgatory. He is said to have appeared to St. Lutgarda in her monastery at Aywieres in Brabant. Engulfed in flames, he declared to her, “I am Pope Innocent”. He continued to explain that he was in purgatory for three faults which had caused him to arrive in this state, the first was never having wanted to bow his head during the recitation of the Nicene Creed as a sign of humility, the other two were not reported. Innocent asked St. Lutgarda to come to his assistance, saying, “Alas! It is terrible; and will last for centuries if you do not come to my assistance. In the name of Mary, who has obtained for me the favour of appealing to you, help me!” At that moment he disappeared and St. Lutgarda informed her sisters of what she had seen as Innocent had asked her to redouble her prayers and penances to free him from purgatory before the consummation of the world. St. Lutgardis heeded his plea and years later he reappeared to her resplendent in glory to thank her for obtaining his release from purgatory. Despite this, he is not officially canonized by the Catholic Church.[42][43] Innocent is one of two popes (the other being Gregory IX) among the 23 historical figures depicted in marble relief portraits above the gallery doors of the U.S. House of Representatives in honor of their influence on the development of American law.[44] Works[edit] His Latin works include De miseria humanae conditionis, a tract on asceticism that Innocent III wrote before becoming pope, and De sacro altaris mysterio, a description and exegesis of the liturgy.[9] "On Heresy: Letter to the Archbishop of Auch, 1198" "On Usury: Letter to the French bishops, 1198" "On Church Independence/Tithes: Letter to a bishop, 1198" "On the crusade and Trade with Saracens: Letter to the Venetians, 1198" "On Jews: Decree of 1199"[19] See also[edit] Biography portal Christianity portal History portal Italy portal List of popes Cardinals created by Innocent III References[edit] ^ "Pope Innocent III (Lotario dei conti di Segni) [Catholic-Hierarchy]". www.catholic-hierarchy.org. Retrieved 6 January 2021. ^ Moore, John (2003). Pope Innocent III (1160/61 – 1216): To Root Up and to Plant. Leiden, Boston: Brill. pp. 102–134. ISBN 90-04-12925-1. ^ a b c d e f g h "Catholic Encyclopedia: Pope Innocent III". Newadvent.org. 1 October 1910. Retrieved 17 February 2010. ^ Jane Sayers, Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1199–1216 London 1994, p. 16 ^ Jane Sayers, Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1199–1216 London 1994, p. 17 ^ Jane Sayers, Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1199–1216 London 1994, p. 18 ^ Jane Sayers, Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1199–1216 London 1994, p. 21 ^ Innocentius III. On the misery of the human condition, De miseria humane conditions. Open Library. OL 21246851M. ^ a b Moore, John C. (1981). "Innocent III's 'De Miseria Humanae Conditions: A Speculum Curiae?'". The Catholic Historical Review. 67 (4): 553–564. JSTOR 25021212. ^ "LOTARIO DEI CONTI DEI SEGNI [POPE INNOCENT III], De miseria humanae conditionis [On the Misery of Human Condition] In Latin, manuscript on parchment likely Italy, c. 1250" (PDF). Les Enluminures, Ltd. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 May 2013. Retrieved 13 January 2011. ^ Schmitt, C. B. (1988). The Cambridge history of Renaissance. ISBN 9780521397483. Retrieved 17 February 2010 – via Google Books. ^ See Julien Théry-Astruc, "Introduction", in Innocent III et le Midi (Cahiers de Fanjeaux, 50), Toulouse, Privat, 2015, pp. 11–35, at pp. 13–14. ^ Civilization in the West, Kishlansky, Geary, O'Brien, Volume A to 1500, Seventh Edition, p. 278 ^ Medieval Sourcebook: Innocent III: Letters on Papal Polices. Fordham.edu ^ a b Muldoon, James. Empire and Order, Springer, 1999, p. 81 ISBN 9780230512238 ^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Pope Innocent III". www.newadvent.org. Retrieved 6 January 2021. ^ Comyn, p. 275 ^ Bryce, p. 206 ^ a b Medieval Sourcebook: Innocent III: Letters on Papal Polices. Fordham.edu ^ a b Comyn, p. 277 ^ "Innocent, III". Encyclopedia of World Biography. 1998 – via Gale. (registration required) ^ a b Powell, James M. Innocent III: Vicar of Christ or Lord of the World? Washington: Catholic University of American Press, 2nd ed., 1994. ISBN 0-8132-0783-5 ^ "Diplomatarium Norvegicum". ^ "Magna Carta: people and society". British Library. Retrieved 23 January 2017. ^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Pope Innocent III". www.newadvent.org. Retrieved 6 January 2021. ^ a b c d Cheney, Christopher R. (1976). Innocent III and England. Stuttgart: Anton Hiersemann. ^ Packard, Sidney Raymond (1927). Europe and the Church under Innocent III. New York: H. Holt. ^ Innocent III, Pope (1969). On the Misery of the Human Condition. De Miseria Humane Conditionis, trans. Donald Roy Howard. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. ^ a b Clayton, Joseph (1941). Pope Innocent III and His Times. Milwaukee: Bruce Pub. ^ Migne, Jacques Paul (1849–1855). Patrologia Latina. Vol. 214–217. Paris: S.I. ^ Villhardouin, Geoffrey De (1908). Memoirs or Chronicle of the Fourth Crusade and The Conquest of Constantinople, trans. Frank T. Marzials. London: J.M. Dent. ^ Elliott-Binns, Leonard (1931). Innocent III. Hamden, Conn: Archon. ^ Roscher, Helmut (1969). Papst Innocenz III. Und Die Kreuzzuge. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck U. Ruprecht. ^ St. Francis of Assisi by G.K. Chesterton (1924), pp. 107–108 ^ Galli (2002), pp. 74–80 ^ Robinson, Paschal. "St. Francis of Assisi." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 6. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1909. 16 December 2018 ^ "Pennington, Kenneth. "The Fourth Lateran Council, its Legislation, and the Development of Legal Procedure", CUA" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 March 2016. Retrieved 17 December 2018. ^ "Church Councils – JewishEncyclopedia.com". www.jewishencyclopedia.com. Retrieved 26 July 2020. ^ "Medieval Sourcebook: Twelfth Ecumenical Council: Lateran IV 1215". Fordham.edu. Retrieved 17 February 2010. ^ "Lateran 4 – 1215". ^ "School of Theology". Sthweb.bu.edu. 2 September 2009. Archived from the original on 3 July 2009. Retrieved 17 February 2010. ^ Schouppe, Fr. F.X., Purgatory. TAN, 2005 ^ "Fr. Hardon Archives – St. Robert Bellarmine, Doctor of the Church". www.therealpresence.org. Retrieved 4 December 2020. ^ "Innocent III". Architect of the Capitol. Retrieved 14 April 2020. Sources[edit] (in Italian and Latin) Constitutiones Concilii quarti lateranensis – Costituzioni del quarto Concilio lateranense, ed. by di M. Albertazzi, La Finestra editrice, Lavis 2016. Barraclough, Geoffrey (1968). The Medieval Papacy. London: Thames and Hudson. Bolton, Brenda, Innocent III. Studies on Papal Authority and Pastoral Care, Variorum, "Collected Studies Series", Aldershot, 1995. The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume VIII. Published 1910. New York: Robert Appleton Company. (in Italian) Maccarrone, Michele (ed.), Chiesa e Stato nella dottrina di papa Innocenzo III, Roma: Ateneo lateranense, 1941. (in Italian) Maccarone, Michele, Studi su Innocenzo III, Padoue, 1972. (in Italian) Maccarone, Michele, Nuovi studi su Innocenzo III, éd. Roberto Lambertini, Rome, Istituto storico italiano per il Medio Evo, 1995. (in German) Maleczek, Werner, Papst und Kardinalskolleg von 1191 bis 1216, Wien, 1984. Moore, John C. "Pope Innocent III, Sardinia, and the Papal State." Speculum, Vol. 62, No. 1. (Jan. 1987), pp. 81–101. doi:10.2307/2852567. JSTOR 2852567. Moore, John C. Pope Innocent III (1160/61–1216): To Root Up and to Plant. Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2003; Notre Dame IN: U. of N.D. Press, 2009 (pb, lacking illustrations). Powell, James M., Innocent III: Vicar of Christ or Lord of the World? 2nd ed.(Washington: Catholic University of American Press, 1994). Sayers, Janet E. Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1198–1216, London, New York, Longman (The Medieval World), 1994. Smith, Damian J. (2017) [2004]. Innocent III and the Crown of Aragon: The Limits of Papal Authority. New York: Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-351-92743-7. (in Italian, French, and German) Andrea Sommerlechner, Andrea (dir.), Innocenzo III. Urbs et Orbis, Rome, Istituto storico italiano per il Medio Evo, 2003, 2 vol. Tillman, Helen, Pope Innocent III, New York, 1980. (in French) Théry-Astruc, Julien, "Introduction", in Innocent III et le Midi (Cahiers de Fanjeaux, 50), Toulouse, Privat, 2015, pp. 11–35. Further reading[edit] Kendall, Keith. "'Mute Dogs, Unable to Bark': Innocent III's Call to Combat Heresy." In Medieval Church Law and the Origins of the Western Legal Tradition: A Tribute to Kenneth Pennington, edited by Wolfgang P. Müller and Mary E. Sommar, 170–178. Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press, 2006. Kendall, Keith. "Sermons of Pope Innocent III: The 'Moral Theology' of a Pastor and Pope." PhD diss., University of Syracuse, 2003. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Innocentius III. Wikiquote has quotations related to: Pope Innocent III Wikisource has original works written by or about: Innocent III INNOCENT III THE GREAT. AN ESSAY ON HIS LIFE AND TIMES. BY C. H. C. PIRIE-GORDON (btm format) Pope Innocent III at Find a Grave Innocent III at the Catholic Encyclopedia Adrian Fletcher's Paradoxplace – Portrait (Subiaco) and Tomb (Lateran) of Innocent III Innocent III's Opera Omnia Cambridge History of Renassiance Philosophy History Medren Ecole Glossary Crusades Lateran Council Pope Innocent III and the Marks of a Great Papacy, article at Catholicism.org TRACES OF THE BOGOMIL MOVEMENT IN ENGLISH Pope Innocent III at the British Library Literature by and about Innozenz III. in the German National Library catalogue Works by and about Pope Innocent III in the Deutsche Digitale Bibliothek (German Digital Library) "Innocentius III papa". Repertorium "Historical Sources of the German Middle Ages" (Geschichtsquellen des deutschen Mittelalters). Meister Eckhart und seine Zeit – Päpste – Innozenz III. Complete works by Migne Patrologia Latina mit Inhaltsverzeichnis Deed by Innocence III for the Stendal Cathedral Chapter, 6 May 1206, "digitalised image". Photograph Archive of Old Original Documents (Lichtbildarchiv älterer Originalurkunden). University of Marburg. Catholic Church titles Preceded by Celestine III Pope 1198–1216 Succeeded by Honorius III v t e Popes of the Catholic Church List of popes graphical canonised Papal names Tombs extant non-extant Antipope Pope emeritus papal resignation Pope-elect 1st–4th centuries During the Roman Empire (until 493) including under Constantine (312–337) Peter Linus Anacletus Clement I Evaristus Alexander I Sixtus I Telesphorus Hyginus Pius I Anicetus Soter Eleutherius Victor I Zephyrinus Callixtus I Urban I Pontian Anterus Fabian Cornelius Lucius I Stephen I Sixtus II Dionysius Felix I Eutychian Caius Marcellinus Marcellus I Eusebius Miltiades Sylvester I Mark Julius I Liberius Damasus I Siricius Anastasius I 5th–8th centuries Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537) Byzantine Papacy (537–752) Frankish Papacy (756–857) Innocent I Zosimus Boniface I Celestine I Sixtus III Leo I Hilarius Simplicius Felix III Gelasius I Anastasius II Symmachus Hormisdas John I Felix IV Boniface II John II Agapetus I Silverius Vigilius Pelagius I John III Benedict I Pelagius II Gregory I Sabinian Boniface III Boniface IV Adeodatus I Boniface V Honorius I Severinus John IV Theodore I Martin I Eugene I Vitalian Adeodatus II Donus Agatho Leo II Benedict II John V Conon Sergius I John VI John VII Sisinnius Constantine Gregory II Gregory III Zachary Stephen II Paul I Stephen III Adrian I Leo III 9th–12th centuries Papal selection before 1059 Saeculum obscurum (904–964) Crescentii era (974–1012) Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044/1048) Imperial Papacy (1048–1257) Stephen IV Paschal I Eugene II Valentine Gregory IV Sergius II Leo IV Benedict III Nicholas I Adrian II John VIII Marinus I Adrian III Stephen V Formosus Boniface VI Stephen VI Romanus Theodore II John IX Benedict IV Leo V Sergius III Anastasius III Lando John X Leo VI Stephen VII John XI Leo VII Stephen VIII Marinus II Agapetus II John XII Benedict V Leo VIII John XIII Benedict VI Benedict VII John XIV John XV Gregory V Sylvester II John XVII John XVIII Sergius IV Benedict VIII John XIX Benedict IX Sylvester III Gregory VI Clement II Damasus II Leo IX Victor II Stephen IX Nicholas II Alexander II Gregory VII Victor III Urban II Paschal II Gelasius II Callixtus II Honorius II Innocent II Celestine II Lucius II Eugene III Anastasius IV Adrian IV Alexander III Lucius III Urban III Gregory VIII Clement III Celestine III Innocent III 13th–16th centuries Viterbo (1257–1281) Orvieto (1262–1297) Perugia (1228–1304) Avignon Papacy (1309–1378) Western Schism (1378–1417) Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534) Reformation Papacy (1534–1585) Baroque Papacy (1585–1689) Honorius III Gregory IX Celestine IV Innocent IV Alexander IV Urban IV Clement IV Gregory X Innocent V Adrian V John XXI Nicholas III Martin IV Honorius IV Nicholas IV Celestine V Boniface VIII Benedict XI Clement V John XXII Benedict XII Clement VI Innocent VI Urban V Gregory XI Urban VI Boniface IX Innocent VII Gregory XII Martin V Eugene IV Nicholas V Callixtus III Pius II Paul II Sixtus IV Innocent VIII Alexander VI Pius III Julius II Leo X Adrian VI Clement VII Paul III Julius III Marcellus II Paul IV Pius IV Pius V Gregory XIII Sixtus V Urban VII Gregory XIV Innocent IX Clement VIII 17th–21st centuries Age of Enlightenment (c. 1640–1740) Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848) Roman Question (1870–1929) Vatican City (1929–present) Leo XI Paul V Gregory XV Urban VIII Innocent X Alexander VII Clement IX Clement X Innocent XI Alexander VIII Innocent XII Clement XI Innocent XIII Benedict XIII Clement XII Benedict XIV Clement XIII Clement XIV Pius VI Pius VII Leo XII Pius VIII Gregory XVI Pius IX Leo XIII Pius X Benedict XV Pius XI Pius XII John XXIII Paul VI John Paul I John Paul II Benedict XVI Francis History of the papacy Antiquity and Early Middle Ages During the Roman Empire (until 493) Under Constantine (312–337) Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537) Byzantine Papacy (537–752) Frankish Papacy (756–857) Saeculum obscurum (904–964) Crescentii era (974–1012) High and Late Middle Ages Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044 / 1048) Imperial Papacy (1048–1257) Wandering Papacy Viterbo, 1257–1281 Orvieto, 1262–1297 Perugia, 1228–1304 Avignon Papacy (1309–1378) Western Schism (1378–1417) Early Modern and Modern Era Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534) Reformation Papacy (1534–1585) Baroque Papacy (1585–1689) Age of Enlightenment (c. 1640–1740) Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848) Roman Question (1870–1929) Vatican City (1929–present) World War II (1939–1945) Cold War (1945–1992) Category Catholic Church Portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History (Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal) Early Church Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church fathers Apostolic fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene Period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology (Bible Tradition; Catechism) General God Trinity Kingdom Body and soul Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks Catholic Infallibility Corporis Christi One true church People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation (Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country) Holy See (List of popes) Pope Francis Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity (Holy orders) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious: Superior Abbot, Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand Master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Liturgical rites Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire West Syriac Malankara Culture Art Marian Artists Authors Church buildings Altarpieces Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Polyglot Press L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders, institutes, societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptorists Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities  Catholic Church portal Category v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380-451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Islamic conquests Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Reformation Catholic Reformation Reformation Catholic Reformation Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine Thirty Years' War Baroque Period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII Consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazism Pope John XXIII Second Vatican Council Pope Paul VI Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa Communism Pope John Paul II World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis COVID-19 pandemic  Vatican City portal  Catholicism portal Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) ISNI 1 VIAF 1 WorldCat National libraries Norway Chile Spain 2 France (data) Catalonia Italy United States Japan Czech Republic Australia Greece Israel Croatia Netherlands Poland Sweden Vatican Art research institutes Artist Names (Getty) Other Faceted Application of Subject Terminology RISM (France) 1 RERO (Switzerland) 1 2 Social Networks and Archival Context SUDOC (France) 1 Trove (Australia) 1 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pope_Innocent_III&oldid=1055873922" Categories: Pope Innocent III 1160s births 1216 deaths 12th-century apocalypticists 12th-century Latin writers 12th-century popes 12th-century Italian cardinals 13th-century apocalypticists 13th-century popes Conti di Segni Cardinal-nephews Christians of the Fifth Crusade Christians of the Fourth Crusade Christians of the Livonian Crusade Italian popes People from the Metropolitan City of Rome Capital People of the Albigensian Crusade Trinitarians 12th-century Italian jurists Hidden categories: CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty Pages with login required references or sources Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 Pages using ordination template and denomination parameter Pages with template ordination embedded Articles containing Latin-language text NPOV disputes from September 2021 All NPOV disputes All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2018 Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with French-language sources (fr) Commons link from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNC identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with CANTIC identifiers Articles with ICCU identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NLI identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with SELIBR identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with RISM identifiers Articles with RERO identifiers Articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with WORLDCATID identifiers AC with 28 elements Articles with multiple identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Languages Afrikaans ??????? Aragonés Asturianu Az?rbaycanca Bân-lâm-gú ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Gaeilge Galego ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ????? ???? Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Winaray ?? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 18 November 2021, at 09:36 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pope_Innocent_III Pope Innocent III - Wikipedia Pope Innocent III From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Not to be confused with Antipope Innocent III. Head of the Catholic Church from 1198 to 1216 Pope Innocent III Bishop of Rome Detail of a fresco at the cloister Sacro Speco, c.?1219 Diocese Diocese of Rome See Holy See Papacy began 8 January 1198 Papacy ended 16 July 1216 Predecessor Celestine III Successor Honorius III Orders Ordination 21 February 1198 Consecration 22 February 1198 by Ottaviano di Paoli Created cardinal September 1190 by Clement III Personal details Birth name Lotario de' Conti di Segni Born 1160 or 1161 Gavignano, Papal States Died 16 July 1216 (aged 55–56) Perugia, Papal States Nationality Italian Denomination Roman Catholic Parents Count Trasimund of Segni and Claricia Scotti Previous post(s) Cardinal-Deacon of St. George in Velabro and Sts. Sergius and Bacchus (1190–1191) Cardinal-Priest of St. Pudentiana (1191–1198) Ordination history History Episcopal consecration Consecrated by Ottaviano di Paoli Date 22 February 1198 Place Rome Cardinalate Elevated by Pope Clement III Date September 1190 Episcopal succession Bishops consecrated by Pope Innocent III as principal consecrator Raynald of Nocera March 1198 Adhémar de Peirat 7 April 1198 John of Leighlin 18 September 1198 Mauger of Worcester 4 June 1200 Albert Longhi 22 June 1203 Malachias of Lismore 5 November 1203 Tommaso Morsini 27 March 1205 Peter des Roches 25 September 1205 Albrecht de Kevenburg 24 December 1206 Guillaume Amanevi 1207 Antelm of Patrae Veteres 29 April 1207 Stephen Langton 17 June 1207 Gérard de Cros 1209 Andrea de Celano 1214 Filippo of Troia October 1214 Christian to the Prussians 1215 Bonfigli of Siena 10 April 1216 Silvester of Evesham 3 July 1216 Other popes named Innocent Papal styles of Pope Innocent III Reference style His Holiness Spoken style Your Holiness Religious style Holy Father Pope Innocent III (Latin: Innocentius III; 1160 or 1161 – 16 July 1216,[1] born Lotario dei Conti di Segni (anglicized as Lothar of Segni) was the head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 8 January 1198 to his death. Pope Innocent was one of the most powerful and influential of the medieval popes. He exerted a wide influence over the Christian states of Europe, claiming supremacy over all of Europe's kings. He was central in supporting the Catholic Church's reforms of ecclesiastical affairs through his decretals and the Fourth Lateran Council. This resulted in a considerable refinement of Western canon law. He is furthermore notable for using interdict and other censures to compel princes to obey his decisions, although these measures were not uniformly successful. Innocent greatly extended the scope of the Crusades, directing crusades against Muslim Iberia and the Holy Land as well as the Albigensian Crusade against the Cathars in southern France. He organized the Fourth Crusade of 1202–1204, which ended in the sack of Constantinople. Although the attack on Constantinople went against his explicit orders, and the Crusaders were subsequently excommunicated, Innocent reluctantly accepted this result, seeing it as the will of God to reunite the Latin and Eastern Orthodox Churches. In the event, the sack of Constantinople and the subsequent period of Frankokratia heightened the hostility between the Latin and Greek churches. (The Byzantine Empire was restored in 1261 but never regained its former strength, finally falling in 1453.[2]) Contents 1 Biography 1.1 Early life 1.2 Election to the papacy 1.3 Reassertion of papal power 1.4 Involvement in Imperial elections 1.5 Feudal power over Europe 1.6 Crusades and suppression of heresy 1.7 Francis of Assisi 1.8 Other religious orders 1.9 Fourth Council of the Lateran 1.10 Death and legacy 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Biography[edit] Early life[edit] Lotario de' Conti was born in Gavignano, Italy, near Anagni.[3] His father Count Trasimondo of Segni was a member of a famous house, the Conti di Segni (Counts of Segni), which produced nine popes including Gregory IX, Alexander IV and Innocent XIII. Lotario was the nephew of Pope Clement III; his mother, Clarissa Scotti (Romani de Scotti), was from the same noble Roman family.[4] Lotario received his early education in Rome, probably at the Benedictine abbey of St Andrea al Celio, under Peter Ismael;[5] he studied theology in Paris under the theologians Peter of Poitiers, Melior of Pisa, and Peter of Corbeil,[6] and (possibly) jurisprudence in Bologna, according to the Gesta (between 1187 and 1189).[7] As pope, Lotario was to play a major role in the shaping of canon law through conciliar canons and decretal letters.[3] Shortly after the death of Alexander III (30 August 1181) Lotario returned to Rome and held various ecclesiastical offices during the short reigns of Lucius III, Urban III, Gregory VIII, and Clement III, being ordained a Subdeacon by Gregory VIII and reaching the rank of Cardinal-Priest under Clement III in 1191. As a cardinal, Lotario wrote De miseria humanae conditionis (On the Misery of the Human Condition).[8][9] The work was very popular for centuries, surviving in more than 700 manuscripts.[10] Although he never returned to the complementary work he intended to write, On the Dignity of Human Nature, Bartolomeo Facio (1400–1457) took up the task writing De excellentia ac praestantia hominis.[11] Election to the papacy[edit] Main article: 1198 papal election Arms of Innocent III at Santo Spirito in Sassia, Rome Celestine III died on 8 January 1198. Before his death he had urged the College of Cardinals to elect Giovanni di San Paolo as his successor, but Lotario de' Conti was elected pope in the ruins of the ancient Septizodium, near the Circus Maximus in Rome after only two ballots on the very day on which Celestine III died. He was only thirty-seven years old at the time.[3] He took the name Innocent III, maybe as a reference to his predecessor Innocent II (1130–1143), who had succeeded in asserting the papacy's authority over the emperor (in contrast with Celestine III's recent policy).[12] Reassertion of papal power[edit] Bulla of Innocent III As pope, Innocent III began with a very wide sense of his responsibility and of his authority. During Innocent III's reign, the papacy was at the height of its powers. He was considered to be the most powerful person in Europe at the time.[13] In 1198, Innocent wrote to the prefect Acerbius and the nobles of Tuscany expressing his support of the medieval political theory of the sun and the moon.[14] His papacy asserted the absolute spiritual authority of his office, while still respecting the temporal authority of kings.[15] There was scarcely a country in Europe over which Innocent III did not in some way or other assert the supremacy which he claimed for the papacy. He excommunicated Alfonso IX of Leon, for marrying a near relative, Berengaria, a daughter of Alfonso VIII, contrary to the laws of the Church, and effected their separation in 1204. For similar reasons he annulled, in 1208, the marriage of the crown-prince, Alfonso of Portugal, with Urraca, daughter of Alfonso of Castile. From Pedro II of Aragon he received that kingdom in vassalage and crowned him king at Rome in 1204.[16] The Muslim recapture of Jerusalem in 1187 was to him a divine judgment on the moral lapses of Christian princes. He was also determined to protect what he called "the liberty of the Church" from inroads by secular princes. This determination meant, among other things, that princes should not be involved in the selection of bishops, and it was focused especially on the "patrimonium" of the papacy, the section of central Italy claimed by the popes and later called the Papal States. The patrimonium was routinely threatened by Hohenstaufen German kings who, as Roman emperors, claimed it for themselves. Emperor Henry VI expected his infant son Frederick to bring Germany, Italy, and Sicily under a single ruler, which would leave the Papal States exceedingly vulnerable.[3] Henry's early death left his 3-year-old son, Frederick, as king of Sicily. Henry VI's widow, Constance of Sicily, ruled over Sicily for her young son before he reached the age of majority. She was as eager to remove German power from the kingdom of Sicily as was Innocent III. Before her death in 1198, she named Innocent as guardian of the young Frederick until he reached his maturity. In exchange, Innocent was also able to recover papal rights in Sicily that had been surrendered decades earlier to King William I of Sicily by Pope Adrian IV. The Pope invested the young Frederick II as King of Sicily in November 1198. He also later induced Frederick II to marry Constance of Aragon, the widow of King Emeric of Hungary, in 1209.[3] Involvement in Imperial elections[edit] Innocent was concerned that the marriage of Henry VI and Constance of Sicily gave the Hohenstaufens a claim to all the Italian peninsula with the exception of the Papal States, which would be surrounded by Imperial territory.[15] After the death of Emperor Henry VI, who had recently also conquered the Kingdom of Sicily, the succession became disputed: as Henry's son Frederick was still a small child, the partisans of the Staufen dynasty elected Henry's brother, Philip, Duke of Swabia, king in March 1198, whereas the princes opposed to the Staufen dynasty elected Otto, Duke of Brunswick, of the House of Welf. King Philip II of France supported Philip's claim, whereas King Richard I of England supported his nephew Otto.[17] In 1201, the pope openly espoused the side of Otto IV, whose family had always been opposed to the house of Hohenstaufen.[18] It is the business of the pope to look after the interests of the Roman empire, since the empire derives its origin and its final authority from the papacy; its origin, because it was originally transferred from Greece by and for the sake of the papacy; ... its final authority, because the emperor is raised to his position by the pope who blesses him, crowns him and invests him with the empire. ...Therefore, since three persons have lately been elected king by different parties, namely the youth [Frederick, son of Henry VI], Philip [of Hohenstaufen, brother of Henry VI], and Otto [of Brunswick, of the Welf family], so also three things must be taken into account in regard to each one, namely: the legality, the suitability and the expediency of his election. ...Far be it from us that we should defer to man rather than to God, or that we should fear the countenance of the powerful. ...On the foregoing grounds, then, we decide that the youth should not at present be given the empire; we utterly reject Philip for his manifest unfitness and we order his usurpation to be resisted by all ... since Otto is not only himself devoted to the church, but comes from devout ancestors on both sides, ... therefore we decree that he ought to be accepted and supported as king, and ought to be given the crown of empire, after the rights of the Roman church have been secured. "Papal Decree on the choice of a German King, 1201"[19] The confusion in the Empire allowed Innocent to drive out the imperial feudal lords from Ancona, Spoleto and Perugia, who had been installed by Emperor Henry VI.[20] On 3 July 1201, the papal legate, Cardinal-Bishop Guido of Palestrina, announced to the people, in the cathedral of Cologne, that Otto IV had been approved by the pope as Roman king and threatened with excommunication all those who refused to acknowledge him. At the same time, Innocent encouraged the cities in Tuscany to form a league called the League of San Genesio against German imperial interests in Italy, and they placed themselves under Innocent's protection.[20] In May 1202, Innocent issued the decree Venerabilem, addressed to the Duke of Zähringen, in which he explained his thinking on the relation between the papacy and the Empire. This decree was afterwards embodied in the Corpus Juris Canonici and contained the following items: The German princes have the right to elect the king, who is afterwards to become emperor. This right was given them by the Apostolic See when it transferred the imperial dignity from the Greeks to the Germans in the person of Charlemagne. The right to investigate and decide whether a king thus elected is worthy of the imperial dignity belongs to the pope, whose office it is to anoint, consecrate, and crown him; otherwise it might happen that the pope would be obliged to anoint, consecrate, and crown a king who was excommunicated, a heretic, or a pagan. If the pope finds that the king who has been elected by the princes is unworthy of the imperial dignity, the princes must elect a new king or, if they refuse, the pope will confer the imperial dignity upon another king; for the Church stands in need of a patron and defender. In case of a double election the pope must exhort the princes to come to an agreement. If after a due interval they have not reached an agreement they must ask the pope to arbitrate, failing which, he must of his own accord and by virtue of his office decide in favour of one of the claimants. The pope's decision need not be based on the greater or less legality of either election, but on the qualifications of the claimants.[3] Despite papal support, Otto could not oust his rival Philip until the latter was murdered in a private feud. His rule now undisputed, Otto reneged on his earlier promises and set his sights on reestablishing Imperial power in Italy and claiming even the Kingdom of Sicily. Given the papal interest to keep Germany and Sicily apart, Innocent now supported his ward, King Frederick of Sicily, to resist Otto's advances and restore the Staufen dynasty to the Holy Roman Empire. Frederick was duly elected by the Staufen partisans.[21] The conflict was decided by the Battle of Bouvines on 27 July 1214, which pitted Otto, allied to King John of England against Philip II Augustus. Otto was defeated by the French and thereafter lost all influence. He died on 19 May 1218, leaving Frederick II the undisputed emperor. Meanwhile, King John was forced to acknowledge the Pope as his feudal lord and accept Stephen Langton as Archbishop of Canterbury.[22] In his turn, Frederick II would later become a bitter opponent of the papacy once his empire was secure. Feudal power over Europe[edit] Innocent III played further roles in the politics of Norway,[23] France, Sweden, Bulgaria, Spain and England.[22] At the request of England's King John, Pope Innocent III declared the Magna Carta annulled, which resulted in a rebellion by the English barons who rejected the disenfranchisement.[24] Crusades and suppression of heresy[edit] The neutrality of this section is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (September 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Innocent launched the Albigensian Crusade against the Cathars. Pope Innocent III was also a zealous protector of the Catholic faith and a strenuous opponent of heresy. His chief activity was turned against the Albigenses who had become so numerous and aggressive that they were no longer satisfied with just being adherents of heretical doctrines but even endeavoured to spread their heresy by force. They were especially numerous in a few cities of Northern and Southern France. During the first year of his pontificate, Innocent sent the two Cistercian monks Rainer and Guido to the Albigenses in France to preach to them the true doctrines of the Catholic faith and dispute with them on controverted topics of religion. The two Cistercian missionaries were soon followed by Diego, Bishop of Osma, then by Saint Dominic and the two papal legates. Peter of Castelnau and Raoul. When, however, these missionaries were ridiculed and despised by the Albigenses, and the papal legate Castelnau was assassinated in 1208, Innocent resorted to force. He ordered the bishops of Southern France to put under interdict the participants in the murder and all the towns that gave shelter to them. He was especially incensed against Count Raymond of Toulouse who had previously been excommunicated by the murdered legate and whom the pope suspected as the instigator of the murder. The count protested his innocence and submitted to the pope but the pope placed no further trust in him. He called upon the King of France, Philip II to raise an army for the suppression of the Albigenses. Under the leadership of Simon of Montfort a cruel campaign ensued against the Albigenses which, despite the protest of Innocent, soon turned into a war of conquest.[25] The Albigensian Crusade led to the deaths of approximately 20,000 men, women and children, Cathar and Catholic alike, decimating the number of practising Cathars and diminishing the region's distinct culture.[26] The conflict took on a political flavor, directed not only against the heretics, but also the nobility of Toulouse and vassals of the Crown of Aragon, and finally brought the region firmly under the control of the king of France. King Peter II of Aragon, Count of Barcelona, was directly involved in the conflict, and was killed in the course of the Battle of Muret in 1213. The conflict largely ended with the Treaty of Paris of 1229, in which the integration of the Occitan territory in the French crown was agreed upon. Pope Innocent III spent a majority of his tenure as Pope (1198–1216) preparing for a great crusade on the Holy Land. His first attempt was the Fourth Crusade (1202–1204) which he decreed by the papal bull Post miserabile in 1198.[27][28] Unlike past popes, Innocent III displayed interest in leading the crusade himself, rather than simply instigating it and allowing secular leaders to organize the expedition according to their own aspirations.[26] Innocent III's first order of business in preaching the crusade was to send missionaries to every Catholic state to endorse the campaign. He sent Peter of Capua to the kings of France and England with specific instructions to convince them to settle their differences, resulting in a truce of five years between the two nations, beginning in 1199. The intent of the truce was not to allow the two kings to lead the crusade, but rather to free their resources to assist the Crusade. For the army's leadership, Innocent aimed his pleas at the knights and nobles of Europe,[26] succeeding in France, where many lords answered the pope's call, including the army's two eventual leaders, Theobald of Champagne and Boniface, marquis of Montferrat. The pope's calls to action were not received with as much enthusiasm in England or Germany, and the expedition became mainly a French affair.[29] The Fourth Crusade was an expensive endeavor. Innocent III chose to raise funds with a new approach: requiring all clergy to donate one fortieth of their income. This marked the first time a pope ever imposed a direct tax on the clergy. He faced many difficulties in collecting this tax, including corrupt tax collectors and disregard in England. He also sent envoys to King John of England and King Philip of France, who pledged to contribute to the campaign,[citation needed] and John also declared his support for the clerical tax in his kingdom. The crusaders too contributed funds: Innocent declared that those who took the crusader's vow, but could no longer fulfill it, could be released by a contribution of funds. The pope put Archbishop Hubert Walter in charge of collecting these dues.[26][30] At the onset of the crusade, the intended destination was Egypt, as the Christians and Muslims were under a truce at the time.[29] An agreement was made between the French Crusaders and the Venetians. The Venetians would supply vessels and supplies for the crusaders and in return the crusaders would pay 85,000 marks (£200,000).[31] Innocent gave his approval of this agreement under two conditions: a representative of the pope must accompany the crusade, and the attack on any other Christians was strictly forbidden. The French failed to raise sufficient funds for payment of the Venetians. As a result, the Crusaders diverted the crusade to the Christian city of Zara at the will of the Venetians, to subsidize the debt. This diversion was adopted without the consent of Innocent III, who threatened excommunication to any who took part in the attack. A majority of the French ignored the threat and attacked Zara, and were excommunicated by Innocent III, but soon were forgiven so as to continue the crusade. A second diversion then occurred when the crusaders decided to conquer Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire, at the behest of the exiled Byzantine prince Alexios IV. This diversion was taken without any knowledge by Innocent III, and he did not learn of it until after the city had been captured.[32] Innocent III was heavily opposed to the attack on Constantinople and sent many letters warning the crusaders to not sack the city. Innocent III excommunicated the crusaders who attacked Byzantine cities, but was unable to physically halt or overturn their actions. The attack on Constantinople led to the start of the Latin Empire's rule of Constantinople, which lasted for the next sixty years.[33] Francis of Assisi[edit] In 1209, Francis of Assisi led his first eleven followers to Rome to seek permission from Pope Innocent III to found a new religious order which was ultimately granted.[34] Upon entry to Rome, the brothers encountered Bishop Guido of Assisi, who had in his company Giovanni di San Paolo, the Cardinal-Bishop of Sabina. The cardinal, who was the confessor of Pope Innocent III, was immediately sympathetic to Francis and agreed to represent Francis to the pope. Reluctantly, Pope Innocent agreed to meet with Francis and the brothers the next day. After several days, the pope agreed to admit the group informally, adding that when God increased the group in grace and number, they could return for an official admittance. The group was tonsured.[35] This was important in part because it recognized Church authority and protected his followers from possible accusations of heresy, as had happened to the Waldensians decades earlier. Though Pope Innocent initially had his doubts, following a dream in which he saw Francis holding up the Basilica of St. John Lateran (the cathedral of Rome, thus the 'home church' of all Christendom), he decided to endorse Francis's order. This occurred, according to tradition, on 16 April 1210, and constituted the official founding of the Franciscan Order. The group, then the "Lesser Brothers" (Order of Friars Minor also known as the Franciscan Order), preached on the streets and had no possessions. They were centered in Porziuncola and preached first in Umbria, before expanding throughout Italy.[36] Other religious orders[edit] The lesser religious orders which Pope Innocent III approved are the Hospitallers of the Holy Ghost on 23 April 1198, the Trinitarians on 17 December 1198, and the Humiliati, in June, 1201. Fourth Council of the Lateran[edit] On 15 November 1215, Pope Innocent III convened the Fourth Lateran Council which was considered to be the most important Church council of the Middle Ages. By its conclusion, it issued seventy reformatory decrees. Among other things, it encouraged creating schools and holding clergy to a higher standard than the laity. Canon 18 forbade clergymen to participate in the practice of the judicial ordeal, effectively banning its use.[37] In order to define fundamental doctrines, the council reviewed the nature of the Holy Eucharist, the ordered annual confession of sins, and prescribed detailed procedures for the election of bishops. The council also mandated a strict lifestyle for clergy. Canon 68 states: Jews and Muslims shall wear a special dress to enable them to be distinguished from Christians so that no Christian shall come to marry them ignorant of who they are.[38] Canon 69 forbade "that Jews be given preferment in public office since this offers them the pretext to vent their wrath against the Christians."[39] It assumes that Jews blaspheme Christ, and therefore, as it would be "too absurd for a blasphemer of Christ to exercise power over Christians",[40] Jews should not be appointed to public offices. Death and legacy[edit] Innocent III honored by the U.S. House of Representatives The Council had set the beginning of the Fifth Crusade for 1217, under the direct leadership of the Church. After the Council, in the spring of 1216, Innocent moved to northern Italy in an attempt to reconcile the maritime cities of Pisa and Genoa by removing the excommunication cast over Pisa by his predecessor Celestine III and concluding a pact with Genoa.[41] Innocent III, however, died suddenly at Perugia[3] on 16 June 1216. He was buried in the cathedral of Perugia, where his body remained until Pope Leo XIII had it transferred to the Lateran in December 1891.[3] After his death, Innocent III was believed to be in purgatory. He is said to have appeared to St. Lutgarda in her monastery at Aywieres in Brabant. Engulfed in flames, he declared to her, “I am Pope Innocent”. He continued to explain that he was in purgatory for three faults which had caused him to arrive in this state, the first was never having wanted to bow his head during the recitation of the Nicene Creed as a sign of humility, the other two were not reported. Innocent asked St. Lutgarda to come to his assistance, saying, “Alas! It is terrible; and will last for centuries if you do not come to my assistance. In the name of Mary, who has obtained for me the favour of appealing to you, help me!” At that moment he disappeared and St. Lutgarda informed her sisters of what she had seen as Innocent had asked her to redouble her prayers and penances to free him from purgatory before the consummation of the world. St. Lutgardis heeded his plea and years later he reappeared to her resplendent in glory to thank her for obtaining his release from purgatory. Despite this, he is not officially canonized by the Catholic Church.[42][43] Innocent is one of two popes (the other being Gregory IX) among the 23 historical figures depicted in marble relief portraits above the gallery doors of the U.S. House of Representatives in honor of their influence on the development of American law.[44] Works[edit] His Latin works include De miseria humanae conditionis, a tract on asceticism that Innocent III wrote before becoming pope, and De sacro altaris mysterio, a description and exegesis of the liturgy.[9] "On Heresy: Letter to the Archbishop of Auch, 1198" "On Usury: Letter to the French bishops, 1198" "On Church Independence/Tithes: Letter to a bishop, 1198" "On the crusade and Trade with Saracens: Letter to the Venetians, 1198" "On Jews: Decree of 1199"[19] See also[edit] Biography portal Christianity portal History portal Italy portal List of popes Cardinals created by Innocent III References[edit] ^ "Pope Innocent III (Lotario dei conti di Segni) [Catholic-Hierarchy]". www.catholic-hierarchy.org. Retrieved 6 January 2021. ^ Moore, John (2003). Pope Innocent III (1160/61 – 1216): To Root Up and to Plant. Leiden, Boston: Brill. pp. 102–134. ISBN 90-04-12925-1. ^ a b c d e f g h "Catholic Encyclopedia: Pope Innocent III". Newadvent.org. 1 October 1910. Retrieved 17 February 2010. ^ Jane Sayers, Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1199–1216 London 1994, p. 16 ^ Jane Sayers, Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1199–1216 London 1994, p. 17 ^ Jane Sayers, Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1199–1216 London 1994, p. 18 ^ Jane Sayers, Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1199–1216 London 1994, p. 21 ^ Innocentius III. On the misery of the human condition, De miseria humane conditions. Open Library. OL 21246851M. ^ a b Moore, John C. (1981). "Innocent III's 'De Miseria Humanae Conditions: A Speculum Curiae?'". The Catholic Historical Review. 67 (4): 553–564. JSTOR 25021212. ^ "LOTARIO DEI CONTI DEI SEGNI [POPE INNOCENT III], De miseria humanae conditionis [On the Misery of Human Condition] In Latin, manuscript on parchment likely Italy, c. 1250" (PDF). Les Enluminures, Ltd. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 May 2013. Retrieved 13 January 2011. ^ Schmitt, C. B. (1988). The Cambridge history of Renaissance. ISBN 9780521397483. Retrieved 17 February 2010 – via Google Books. ^ See Julien Théry-Astruc, "Introduction", in Innocent III et le Midi (Cahiers de Fanjeaux, 50), Toulouse, Privat, 2015, pp. 11–35, at pp. 13–14. ^ Civilization in the West, Kishlansky, Geary, O'Brien, Volume A to 1500, Seventh Edition, p. 278 ^ Medieval Sourcebook: Innocent III: Letters on Papal Polices. Fordham.edu ^ a b Muldoon, James. Empire and Order, Springer, 1999, p. 81 ISBN 9780230512238 ^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Pope Innocent III". www.newadvent.org. Retrieved 6 January 2021. ^ Comyn, p. 275 ^ Bryce, p. 206 ^ a b Medieval Sourcebook: Innocent III: Letters on Papal Polices. Fordham.edu ^ a b Comyn, p. 277 ^ "Innocent, III". Encyclopedia of World Biography. 1998 – via Gale. (registration required) ^ a b Powell, James M. Innocent III: Vicar of Christ or Lord of the World? Washington: Catholic University of American Press, 2nd ed., 1994. ISBN 0-8132-0783-5 ^ "Diplomatarium Norvegicum". ^ "Magna Carta: people and society". British Library. Retrieved 23 January 2017. ^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Pope Innocent III". www.newadvent.org. Retrieved 6 January 2021. ^ a b c d Cheney, Christopher R. (1976). Innocent III and England. Stuttgart: Anton Hiersemann. ^ Packard, Sidney Raymond (1927). Europe and the Church under Innocent III. New York: H. Holt. ^ Innocent III, Pope (1969). On the Misery of the Human Condition. De Miseria Humane Conditionis, trans. Donald Roy Howard. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. ^ a b Clayton, Joseph (1941). Pope Innocent III and His Times. Milwaukee: Bruce Pub. ^ Migne, Jacques Paul (1849–1855). Patrologia Latina. Vol. 214–217. Paris: S.I. ^ Villhardouin, Geoffrey De (1908). Memoirs or Chronicle of the Fourth Crusade and The Conquest of Constantinople, trans. Frank T. Marzials. London: J.M. Dent. ^ Elliott-Binns, Leonard (1931). Innocent III. Hamden, Conn: Archon. ^ Roscher, Helmut (1969). Papst Innocenz III. Und Die Kreuzzuge. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck U. Ruprecht. ^ St. Francis of Assisi by G.K. Chesterton (1924), pp. 107–108 ^ Galli (2002), pp. 74–80 ^ Robinson, Paschal. "St. Francis of Assisi." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 6. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1909. 16 December 2018 ^ "Pennington, Kenneth. "The Fourth Lateran Council, its Legislation, and the Development of Legal Procedure", CUA" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 March 2016. Retrieved 17 December 2018. ^ "Church Councils – JewishEncyclopedia.com". www.jewishencyclopedia.com. Retrieved 26 July 2020. ^ "Medieval Sourcebook: Twelfth Ecumenical Council: Lateran IV 1215". Fordham.edu. Retrieved 17 February 2010. ^ "Lateran 4 – 1215". ^ "School of Theology". Sthweb.bu.edu. 2 September 2009. Archived from the original on 3 July 2009. Retrieved 17 February 2010. ^ Schouppe, Fr. F.X., Purgatory. TAN, 2005 ^ "Fr. Hardon Archives – St. Robert Bellarmine, Doctor of the Church". www.therealpresence.org. Retrieved 4 December 2020. ^ "Innocent III". Architect of the Capitol. Retrieved 14 April 2020. Sources[edit] (in Italian and Latin) Constitutiones Concilii quarti lateranensis – Costituzioni del quarto Concilio lateranense, ed. by di M. Albertazzi, La Finestra editrice, Lavis 2016. Barraclough, Geoffrey (1968). The Medieval Papacy. London: Thames and Hudson. Bolton, Brenda, Innocent III. Studies on Papal Authority and Pastoral Care, Variorum, "Collected Studies Series", Aldershot, 1995. The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume VIII. Published 1910. New York: Robert Appleton Company. (in Italian) Maccarrone, Michele (ed.), Chiesa e Stato nella dottrina di papa Innocenzo III, Roma: Ateneo lateranense, 1941. (in Italian) Maccarone, Michele, Studi su Innocenzo III, Padoue, 1972. (in Italian) Maccarone, Michele, Nuovi studi su Innocenzo III, éd. Roberto Lambertini, Rome, Istituto storico italiano per il Medio Evo, 1995. (in German) Maleczek, Werner, Papst und Kardinalskolleg von 1191 bis 1216, Wien, 1984. Moore, John C. "Pope Innocent III, Sardinia, and the Papal State." Speculum, Vol. 62, No. 1. (Jan. 1987), pp. 81–101. doi:10.2307/2852567. JSTOR 2852567. Moore, John C. Pope Innocent III (1160/61–1216): To Root Up and to Plant. Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2003; Notre Dame IN: U. of N.D. Press, 2009 (pb, lacking illustrations). Powell, James M., Innocent III: Vicar of Christ or Lord of the World? 2nd ed.(Washington: Catholic University of American Press, 1994). Sayers, Janet E. Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1198–1216, London, New York, Longman (The Medieval World), 1994. Smith, Damian J. (2017) [2004]. Innocent III and the Crown of Aragon: The Limits of Papal Authority. New York: Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-351-92743-7. (in Italian, French, and German) Andrea Sommerlechner, Andrea (dir.), Innocenzo III. Urbs et Orbis, Rome, Istituto storico italiano per il Medio Evo, 2003, 2 vol. Tillman, Helen, Pope Innocent III, New York, 1980. (in French) Théry-Astruc, Julien, "Introduction", in Innocent III et le Midi (Cahiers de Fanjeaux, 50), Toulouse, Privat, 2015, pp. 11–35. Further reading[edit] Kendall, Keith. "'Mute Dogs, Unable to Bark': Innocent III's Call to Combat Heresy." In Medieval Church Law and the Origins of the Western Legal Tradition: A Tribute to Kenneth Pennington, edited by Wolfgang P. Müller and Mary E. Sommar, 170–178. Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press, 2006. Kendall, Keith. "Sermons of Pope Innocent III: The 'Moral Theology' of a Pastor and Pope." PhD diss., University of Syracuse, 2003. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Innocentius III. Wikiquote has quotations related to: Pope Innocent III Wikisource has original works written by or about: Innocent III INNOCENT III THE GREAT. AN ESSAY ON HIS LIFE AND TIMES. BY C. H. C. PIRIE-GORDON (btm format) Pope Innocent III at Find a Grave Innocent III at the Catholic Encyclopedia Adrian Fletcher's Paradoxplace – Portrait (Subiaco) and Tomb (Lateran) of Innocent III Innocent III's Opera Omnia Cambridge History of Renassiance Philosophy History Medren Ecole Glossary Crusades Lateran Council Pope Innocent III and the Marks of a Great Papacy, article at Catholicism.org TRACES OF THE BOGOMIL MOVEMENT IN ENGLISH Pope Innocent III at the British Library Literature by and about Innozenz III. in the German National Library catalogue Works by and about Pope Innocent III in the Deutsche Digitale Bibliothek (German Digital Library) "Innocentius III papa". Repertorium "Historical Sources of the German Middle Ages" (Geschichtsquellen des deutschen Mittelalters). Meister Eckhart und seine Zeit – Päpste – Innozenz III. Complete works by Migne Patrologia Latina mit Inhaltsverzeichnis Deed by Innocence III for the Stendal Cathedral Chapter, 6 May 1206, "digitalised image". Photograph Archive of Old Original Documents (Lichtbildarchiv älterer Originalurkunden). University of Marburg. Catholic Church titles Preceded by Celestine III Pope 1198–1216 Succeeded by Honorius III v t e Popes of the Catholic Church List of popes graphical canonised Papal names Tombs extant non-extant Antipope Pope emeritus papal resignation Pope-elect 1st–4th centuries During the Roman Empire (until 493) including under Constantine (312–337) Peter Linus Anacletus Clement I Evaristus Alexander I Sixtus I Telesphorus Hyginus Pius I Anicetus Soter Eleutherius Victor I Zephyrinus Callixtus I Urban I Pontian Anterus Fabian Cornelius Lucius I Stephen I Sixtus II Dionysius Felix I Eutychian Caius Marcellinus Marcellus I Eusebius Miltiades Sylvester I Mark Julius I Liberius Damasus I Siricius Anastasius I 5th–8th centuries Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537) Byzantine Papacy (537–752) Frankish Papacy (756–857) Innocent I Zosimus Boniface I Celestine I Sixtus III Leo I Hilarius Simplicius Felix III Gelasius I Anastasius II Symmachus Hormisdas John I Felix IV Boniface II John II Agapetus I Silverius Vigilius Pelagius I John III Benedict I Pelagius II Gregory I Sabinian Boniface III Boniface IV Adeodatus I Boniface V Honorius I Severinus John IV Theodore I Martin I Eugene I Vitalian Adeodatus II Donus Agatho Leo II Benedict II John V Conon Sergius I John VI John VII Sisinnius Constantine Gregory II Gregory III Zachary Stephen II Paul I Stephen III Adrian I Leo III 9th–12th centuries Papal selection before 1059 Saeculum obscurum (904–964) Crescentii era (974–1012) Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044/1048) Imperial Papacy (1048–1257) Stephen IV Paschal I Eugene II Valentine Gregory IV Sergius II Leo IV Benedict III Nicholas I Adrian II John VIII Marinus I Adrian III Stephen V Formosus Boniface VI Stephen VI Romanus Theodore II John IX Benedict IV Leo V Sergius III Anastasius III Lando John X Leo VI Stephen VII John XI Leo VII Stephen VIII Marinus II Agapetus II John XII Benedict V Leo VIII John XIII Benedict VI Benedict VII John XIV John XV Gregory V Sylvester II John XVII John XVIII Sergius IV Benedict VIII John XIX Benedict IX Sylvester III Gregory VI Clement II Damasus II Leo IX Victor II Stephen IX Nicholas II Alexander II Gregory VII Victor III Urban II Paschal II Gelasius II Callixtus II Honorius II Innocent II Celestine II Lucius II Eugene III Anastasius IV Adrian IV Alexander III Lucius III Urban III Gregory VIII Clement III Celestine III Innocent III 13th–16th centuries Viterbo (1257–1281) Orvieto (1262–1297) Perugia (1228–1304) Avignon Papacy (1309–1378) Western Schism (1378–1417) Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534) Reformation Papacy (1534–1585) Baroque Papacy (1585–1689) Honorius III Gregory IX Celestine IV Innocent IV Alexander IV Urban IV Clement IV Gregory X Innocent V Adrian V John XXI Nicholas III Martin IV Honorius IV Nicholas IV Celestine V Boniface VIII Benedict XI Clement V John XXII Benedict XII Clement VI Innocent VI Urban V Gregory XI Urban VI Boniface IX Innocent VII Gregory XII Martin V Eugene IV Nicholas V Callixtus III Pius II Paul II Sixtus IV Innocent VIII Alexander VI Pius III Julius II Leo X Adrian VI Clement VII Paul III Julius III Marcellus II Paul IV Pius IV Pius V Gregory XIII Sixtus V Urban VII Gregory XIV Innocent IX Clement VIII 17th–21st centuries Age of Enlightenment (c. 1640–1740) Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848) Roman Question (1870–1929) Vatican City (1929–present) Leo XI Paul V Gregory XV Urban VIII Innocent X Alexander VII Clement IX Clement X Innocent XI Alexander VIII Innocent XII Clement XI Innocent XIII Benedict XIII Clement XII Benedict XIV Clement XIII Clement XIV Pius VI Pius VII Leo XII Pius VIII Gregory XVI Pius IX Leo XIII Pius X Benedict XV Pius XI Pius XII John XXIII Paul VI John Paul I John Paul II Benedict XVI Francis History of the papacy Antiquity and Early Middle Ages During the Roman Empire (until 493) Under Constantine (312–337) Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537) Byzantine Papacy (537–752) Frankish Papacy (756–857) Saeculum obscurum (904–964) Crescentii era (974–1012) High and Late Middle Ages Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044 / 1048) Imperial Papacy (1048–1257) Wandering Papacy Viterbo, 1257–1281 Orvieto, 1262–1297 Perugia, 1228–1304 Avignon Papacy (1309–1378) Western Schism (1378–1417) Early Modern and Modern Era Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534) Reformation Papacy (1534–1585) Baroque Papacy (1585–1689) Age of Enlightenment (c. 1640–1740) Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848) Roman Question (1870–1929) Vatican City (1929–present) World War II (1939–1945) Cold War (1945–1992) Category Catholic Church Portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History (Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal) Early Church Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church fathers Apostolic fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene Period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology (Bible Tradition; Catechism) General God Trinity Kingdom Body and soul Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks Catholic Infallibility Corporis Christi One true church People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation (Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country) Holy See (List of popes) Pope Francis Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity (Holy orders) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious: Superior Abbot, Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand Master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Liturgical rites Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire West Syriac Malankara Culture Art Marian Artists Authors Church buildings Altarpieces Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Polyglot Press L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders, institutes, societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptorists Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities  Catholic Church portal Category v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380-451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Islamic conquests Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Reformation Catholic Reformation Reformation Catholic Reformation Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine Thirty Years' War Baroque Period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII Consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazism Pope John XXIII Second Vatican Council Pope Paul VI Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa Communism Pope John Paul II World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis COVID-19 pandemic  Vatican City portal  Catholicism portal Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) ISNI 1 VIAF 1 WorldCat National libraries Norway Chile Spain 2 France (data) Catalonia Italy United States Japan Czech Republic Australia Greece Israel Croatia Netherlands Poland Sweden Vatican Art research institutes Artist Names (Getty) Other Faceted Application of Subject Terminology RISM (France) 1 RERO (Switzerland) 1 2 Social Networks and Archival Context SUDOC (France) 1 Trove (Australia) 1 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pope_Innocent_III&oldid=1055873922" Categories: Pope Innocent III 1160s births 1216 deaths 12th-century apocalypticists 12th-century Latin writers 12th-century popes 12th-century Italian cardinals 13th-century apocalypticists 13th-century popes Conti di Segni Cardinal-nephews Christians of the Fifth Crusade Christians of the Fourth Crusade Christians of the Livonian Crusade Italian popes People from the Metropolitan City of Rome Capital People of the Albigensian Crusade Trinitarians 12th-century Italian jurists Hidden categories: CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty Pages with login required references or sources Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 Pages using ordination template and denomination parameter Pages with template ordination embedded Articles containing Latin-language text NPOV disputes from September 2021 All NPOV disputes All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2018 Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with French-language sources (fr) Commons link from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNC identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with CANTIC identifiers Articles with ICCU identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NLI identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with SELIBR identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with RISM identifiers Articles with RERO identifiers Articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with WORLDCATID identifiers AC with 28 elements Articles with multiple identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Languages Afrikaans ??????? Aragonés Asturianu Az?rbaycanca Bân-lâm-gú ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Gaeilge Galego ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ????? ???? Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Winaray ?? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 18 November 2021, at 09:36 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pope_Innocent_III Pope Innocent III - Wikipedia Pope Innocent III From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Not to be confused with Antipope Innocent III. Head of the Catholic Church from 1198 to 1216 Pope Innocent III Bishop of Rome Detail of a fresco at the cloister Sacro Speco, c.?1219 Diocese Diocese of Rome See Holy See Papacy began 8 January 1198 Papacy ended 16 July 1216 Predecessor Celestine III Successor Honorius III Orders Ordination 21 February 1198 Consecration 22 February 1198 by Ottaviano di Paoli Created cardinal September 1190 by Clement III Personal details Birth name Lotario de' Conti di Segni Born 1160 or 1161 Gavignano, Papal States Died 16 July 1216 (aged 55–56) Perugia, Papal States Nationality Italian Denomination Roman Catholic Parents Count Trasimund of Segni and Claricia Scotti Previous post(s) Cardinal-Deacon of St. George in Velabro and Sts. Sergius and Bacchus (1190–1191) Cardinal-Priest of St. Pudentiana (1191–1198) Ordination history History Episcopal consecration Consecrated by Ottaviano di Paoli Date 22 February 1198 Place Rome Cardinalate Elevated by Pope Clement III Date September 1190 Episcopal succession Bishops consecrated by Pope Innocent III as principal consecrator Raynald of Nocera March 1198 Adhémar de Peirat 7 April 1198 John of Leighlin 18 September 1198 Mauger of Worcester 4 June 1200 Albert Longhi 22 June 1203 Malachias of Lismore 5 November 1203 Tommaso Morsini 27 March 1205 Peter des Roches 25 September 1205 Albrecht de Kevenburg 24 December 1206 Guillaume Amanevi 1207 Antelm of Patrae Veteres 29 April 1207 Stephen Langton 17 June 1207 Gérard de Cros 1209 Andrea de Celano 1214 Filippo of Troia October 1214 Christian to the Prussians 1215 Bonfigli of Siena 10 April 1216 Silvester of Evesham 3 July 1216 Other popes named Innocent Papal styles of Pope Innocent III Reference style His Holiness Spoken style Your Holiness Religious style Holy Father Pope Innocent III (Latin: Innocentius III; 1160 or 1161 – 16 July 1216,[1] born Lotario dei Conti di Segni (anglicized as Lothar of Segni) was the head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 8 January 1198 to his death. Pope Innocent was one of the most powerful and influential of the medieval popes. He exerted a wide influence over the Christian states of Europe, claiming supremacy over all of Europe's kings. He was central in supporting the Catholic Church's reforms of ecclesiastical affairs through his decretals and the Fourth Lateran Council. This resulted in a considerable refinement of Western canon law. He is furthermore notable for using interdict and other censures to compel princes to obey his decisions, although these measures were not uniformly successful. Innocent greatly extended the scope of the Crusades, directing crusades against Muslim Iberia and the Holy Land as well as the Albigensian Crusade against the Cathars in southern France. He organized the Fourth Crusade of 1202–1204, which ended in the sack of Constantinople. Although the attack on Constantinople went against his explicit orders, and the Crusaders were subsequently excommunicated, Innocent reluctantly accepted this result, seeing it as the will of God to reunite the Latin and Eastern Orthodox Churches. In the event, the sack of Constantinople and the subsequent period of Frankokratia heightened the hostility between the Latin and Greek churches. (The Byzantine Empire was restored in 1261 but never regained its former strength, finally falling in 1453.[2]) Contents 1 Biography 1.1 Early life 1.2 Election to the papacy 1.3 Reassertion of papal power 1.4 Involvement in Imperial elections 1.5 Feudal power over Europe 1.6 Crusades and suppression of heresy 1.7 Francis of Assisi 1.8 Other religious orders 1.9 Fourth Council of the Lateran 1.10 Death and legacy 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Biography[edit] Early life[edit] Lotario de' Conti was born in Gavignano, Italy, near Anagni.[3] His father Count Trasimondo of Segni was a member of a famous house, the Conti di Segni (Counts of Segni), which produced nine popes including Gregory IX, Alexander IV and Innocent XIII. Lotario was the nephew of Pope Clement III; his mother, Clarissa Scotti (Romani de Scotti), was from the same noble Roman family.[4] Lotario received his early education in Rome, probably at the Benedictine abbey of St Andrea al Celio, under Peter Ismael;[5] he studied theology in Paris under the theologians Peter of Poitiers, Melior of Pisa, and Peter of Corbeil,[6] and (possibly) jurisprudence in Bologna, according to the Gesta (between 1187 and 1189).[7] As pope, Lotario was to play a major role in the shaping of canon law through conciliar canons and decretal letters.[3] Shortly after the death of Alexander III (30 August 1181) Lotario returned to Rome and held various ecclesiastical offices during the short reigns of Lucius III, Urban III, Gregory VIII, and Clement III, being ordained a Subdeacon by Gregory VIII and reaching the rank of Cardinal-Priest under Clement III in 1191. As a cardinal, Lotario wrote De miseria humanae conditionis (On the Misery of the Human Condition).[8][9] The work was very popular for centuries, surviving in more than 700 manuscripts.[10] Although he never returned to the complementary work he intended to write, On the Dignity of Human Nature, Bartolomeo Facio (1400–1457) took up the task writing De excellentia ac praestantia hominis.[11] Election to the papacy[edit] Main article: 1198 papal election Arms of Innocent III at Santo Spirito in Sassia, Rome Celestine III died on 8 January 1198. Before his death he had urged the College of Cardinals to elect Giovanni di San Paolo as his successor, but Lotario de' Conti was elected pope in the ruins of the ancient Septizodium, near the Circus Maximus in Rome after only two ballots on the very day on which Celestine III died. He was only thirty-seven years old at the time.[3] He took the name Innocent III, maybe as a reference to his predecessor Innocent II (1130–1143), who had succeeded in asserting the papacy's authority over the emperor (in contrast with Celestine III's recent policy).[12] Reassertion of papal power[edit] Bulla of Innocent III As pope, Innocent III began with a very wide sense of his responsibility and of his authority. During Innocent III's reign, the papacy was at the height of its powers. He was considered to be the most powerful person in Europe at the time.[13] In 1198, Innocent wrote to the prefect Acerbius and the nobles of Tuscany expressing his support of the medieval political theory of the sun and the moon.[14] His papacy asserted the absolute spiritual authority of his office, while still respecting the temporal authority of kings.[15] There was scarcely a country in Europe over which Innocent III did not in some way or other assert the supremacy which he claimed for the papacy. He excommunicated Alfonso IX of Leon, for marrying a near relative, Berengaria, a daughter of Alfonso VIII, contrary to the laws of the Church, and effected their separation in 1204. For similar reasons he annulled, in 1208, the marriage of the crown-prince, Alfonso of Portugal, with Urraca, daughter of Alfonso of Castile. From Pedro II of Aragon he received that kingdom in vassalage and crowned him king at Rome in 1204.[16] The Muslim recapture of Jerusalem in 1187 was to him a divine judgment on the moral lapses of Christian princes. He was also determined to protect what he called "the liberty of the Church" from inroads by secular princes. This determination meant, among other things, that princes should not be involved in the selection of bishops, and it was focused especially on the "patrimonium" of the papacy, the section of central Italy claimed by the popes and later called the Papal States. The patrimonium was routinely threatened by Hohenstaufen German kings who, as Roman emperors, claimed it for themselves. Emperor Henry VI expected his infant son Frederick to bring Germany, Italy, and Sicily under a single ruler, which would leave the Papal States exceedingly vulnerable.[3] Henry's early death left his 3-year-old son, Frederick, as king of Sicily. Henry VI's widow, Constance of Sicily, ruled over Sicily for her young son before he reached the age of majority. She was as eager to remove German power from the kingdom of Sicily as was Innocent III. Before her death in 1198, she named Innocent as guardian of the young Frederick until he reached his maturity. In exchange, Innocent was also able to recover papal rights in Sicily that had been surrendered decades earlier to King William I of Sicily by Pope Adrian IV. The Pope invested the young Frederick II as King of Sicily in November 1198. He also later induced Frederick II to marry Constance of Aragon, the widow of King Emeric of Hungary, in 1209.[3] Involvement in Imperial elections[edit] Innocent was concerned that the marriage of Henry VI and Constance of Sicily gave the Hohenstaufens a claim to all the Italian peninsula with the exception of the Papal States, which would be surrounded by Imperial territory.[15] After the death of Emperor Henry VI, who had recently also conquered the Kingdom of Sicily, the succession became disputed: as Henry's son Frederick was still a small child, the partisans of the Staufen dynasty elected Henry's brother, Philip, Duke of Swabia, king in March 1198, whereas the princes opposed to the Staufen dynasty elected Otto, Duke of Brunswick, of the House of Welf. King Philip II of France supported Philip's claim, whereas King Richard I of England supported his nephew Otto.[17] In 1201, the pope openly espoused the side of Otto IV, whose family had always been opposed to the house of Hohenstaufen.[18] It is the business of the pope to look after the interests of the Roman empire, since the empire derives its origin and its final authority from the papacy; its origin, because it was originally transferred from Greece by and for the sake of the papacy; ... its final authority, because the emperor is raised to his position by the pope who blesses him, crowns him and invests him with the empire. ...Therefore, since three persons have lately been elected king by different parties, namely the youth [Frederick, son of Henry VI], Philip [of Hohenstaufen, brother of Henry VI], and Otto [of Brunswick, of the Welf family], so also three things must be taken into account in regard to each one, namely: the legality, the suitability and the expediency of his election. ...Far be it from us that we should defer to man rather than to God, or that we should fear the countenance of the powerful. ...On the foregoing grounds, then, we decide that the youth should not at present be given the empire; we utterly reject Philip for his manifest unfitness and we order his usurpation to be resisted by all ... since Otto is not only himself devoted to the church, but comes from devout ancestors on both sides, ... therefore we decree that he ought to be accepted and supported as king, and ought to be given the crown of empire, after the rights of the Roman church have been secured. "Papal Decree on the choice of a German King, 1201"[19] The confusion in the Empire allowed Innocent to drive out the imperial feudal lords from Ancona, Spoleto and Perugia, who had been installed by Emperor Henry VI.[20] On 3 July 1201, the papal legate, Cardinal-Bishop Guido of Palestrina, announced to the people, in the cathedral of Cologne, that Otto IV had been approved by the pope as Roman king and threatened with excommunication all those who refused to acknowledge him. At the same time, Innocent encouraged the cities in Tuscany to form a league called the League of San Genesio against German imperial interests in Italy, and they placed themselves under Innocent's protection.[20] In May 1202, Innocent issued the decree Venerabilem, addressed to the Duke of Zähringen, in which he explained his thinking on the relation between the papacy and the Empire. This decree was afterwards embodied in the Corpus Juris Canonici and contained the following items: The German princes have the right to elect the king, who is afterwards to become emperor. This right was given them by the Apostolic See when it transferred the imperial dignity from the Greeks to the Germans in the person of Charlemagne. The right to investigate and decide whether a king thus elected is worthy of the imperial dignity belongs to the pope, whose office it is to anoint, consecrate, and crown him; otherwise it might happen that the pope would be obliged to anoint, consecrate, and crown a king who was excommunicated, a heretic, or a pagan. If the pope finds that the king who has been elected by the princes is unworthy of the imperial dignity, the princes must elect a new king or, if they refuse, the pope will confer the imperial dignity upon another king; for the Church stands in need of a patron and defender. In case of a double election the pope must exhort the princes to come to an agreement. If after a due interval they have not reached an agreement they must ask the pope to arbitrate, failing which, he must of his own accord and by virtue of his office decide in favour of one of the claimants. The pope's decision need not be based on the greater or less legality of either election, but on the qualifications of the claimants.[3] Despite papal support, Otto could not oust his rival Philip until the latter was murdered in a private feud. His rule now undisputed, Otto reneged on his earlier promises and set his sights on reestablishing Imperial power in Italy and claiming even the Kingdom of Sicily. Given the papal interest to keep Germany and Sicily apart, Innocent now supported his ward, King Frederick of Sicily, to resist Otto's advances and restore the Staufen dynasty to the Holy Roman Empire. Frederick was duly elected by the Staufen partisans.[21] The conflict was decided by the Battle of Bouvines on 27 July 1214, which pitted Otto, allied to King John of England against Philip II Augustus. Otto was defeated by the French and thereafter lost all influence. He died on 19 May 1218, leaving Frederick II the undisputed emperor. Meanwhile, King John was forced to acknowledge the Pope as his feudal lord and accept Stephen Langton as Archbishop of Canterbury.[22] In his turn, Frederick II would later become a bitter opponent of the papacy once his empire was secure. Feudal power over Europe[edit] Innocent III played further roles in the politics of Norway,[23] France, Sweden, Bulgaria, Spain and England.[22] At the request of England's King John, Pope Innocent III declared the Magna Carta annulled, which resulted in a rebellion by the English barons who rejected the disenfranchisement.[24] Crusades and suppression of heresy[edit] The neutrality of this section is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (September 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Innocent launched the Albigensian Crusade against the Cathars. Pope Innocent III was also a zealous protector of the Catholic faith and a strenuous opponent of heresy. His chief activity was turned against the Albigenses who had become so numerous and aggressive that they were no longer satisfied with just being adherents of heretical doctrines but even endeavoured to spread their heresy by force. They were especially numerous in a few cities of Northern and Southern France. During the first year of his pontificate, Innocent sent the two Cistercian monks Rainer and Guido to the Albigenses in France to preach to them the true doctrines of the Catholic faith and dispute with them on controverted topics of religion. The two Cistercian missionaries were soon followed by Diego, Bishop of Osma, then by Saint Dominic and the two papal legates. Peter of Castelnau and Raoul. When, however, these missionaries were ridiculed and despised by the Albigenses, and the papal legate Castelnau was assassinated in 1208, Innocent resorted to force. He ordered the bishops of Southern France to put under interdict the participants in the murder and all the towns that gave shelter to them. He was especially incensed against Count Raymond of Toulouse who had previously been excommunicated by the murdered legate and whom the pope suspected as the instigator of the murder. The count protested his innocence and submitted to the pope but the pope placed no further trust in him. He called upon the King of France, Philip II to raise an army for the suppression of the Albigenses. Under the leadership of Simon of Montfort a cruel campaign ensued against the Albigenses which, despite the protest of Innocent, soon turned into a war of conquest.[25] The Albigensian Crusade led to the deaths of approximately 20,000 men, women and children, Cathar and Catholic alike, decimating the number of practising Cathars and diminishing the region's distinct culture.[26] The conflict took on a political flavor, directed not only against the heretics, but also the nobility of Toulouse and vassals of the Crown of Aragon, and finally brought the region firmly under the control of the king of France. King Peter II of Aragon, Count of Barcelona, was directly involved in the conflict, and was killed in the course of the Battle of Muret in 1213. The conflict largely ended with the Treaty of Paris of 1229, in which the integration of the Occitan territory in the French crown was agreed upon. Pope Innocent III spent a majority of his tenure as Pope (1198–1216) preparing for a great crusade on the Holy Land. His first attempt was the Fourth Crusade (1202–1204) which he decreed by the papal bull Post miserabile in 1198.[27][28] Unlike past popes, Innocent III displayed interest in leading the crusade himself, rather than simply instigating it and allowing secular leaders to organize the expedition according to their own aspirations.[26] Innocent III's first order of business in preaching the crusade was to send missionaries to every Catholic state to endorse the campaign. He sent Peter of Capua to the kings of France and England with specific instructions to convince them to settle their differences, resulting in a truce of five years between the two nations, beginning in 1199. The intent of the truce was not to allow the two kings to lead the crusade, but rather to free their resources to assist the Crusade. For the army's leadership, Innocent aimed his pleas at the knights and nobles of Europe,[26] succeeding in France, where many lords answered the pope's call, including the army's two eventual leaders, Theobald of Champagne and Boniface, marquis of Montferrat. The pope's calls to action were not received with as much enthusiasm in England or Germany, and the expedition became mainly a French affair.[29] The Fourth Crusade was an expensive endeavor. Innocent III chose to raise funds with a new approach: requiring all clergy to donate one fortieth of their income. This marked the first time a pope ever imposed a direct tax on the clergy. He faced many difficulties in collecting this tax, including corrupt tax collectors and disregard in England. He also sent envoys to King John of England and King Philip of France, who pledged to contribute to the campaign,[citation needed] and John also declared his support for the clerical tax in his kingdom. The crusaders too contributed funds: Innocent declared that those who took the crusader's vow, but could no longer fulfill it, could be released by a contribution of funds. The pope put Archbishop Hubert Walter in charge of collecting these dues.[26][30] At the onset of the crusade, the intended destination was Egypt, as the Christians and Muslims were under a truce at the time.[29] An agreement was made between the French Crusaders and the Venetians. The Venetians would supply vessels and supplies for the crusaders and in return the crusaders would pay 85,000 marks (£200,000).[31] Innocent gave his approval of this agreement under two conditions: a representative of the pope must accompany the crusade, and the attack on any other Christians was strictly forbidden. The French failed to raise sufficient funds for payment of the Venetians. As a result, the Crusaders diverted the crusade to the Christian city of Zara at the will of the Venetians, to subsidize the debt. This diversion was adopted without the consent of Innocent III, who threatened excommunication to any who took part in the attack. A majority of the French ignored the threat and attacked Zara, and were excommunicated by Innocent III, but soon were forgiven so as to continue the crusade. A second diversion then occurred when the crusaders decided to conquer Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire, at the behest of the exiled Byzantine prince Alexios IV. This diversion was taken without any knowledge by Innocent III, and he did not learn of it until after the city had been captured.[32] Innocent III was heavily opposed to the attack on Constantinople and sent many letters warning the crusaders to not sack the city. Innocent III excommunicated the crusaders who attacked Byzantine cities, but was unable to physically halt or overturn their actions. The attack on Constantinople led to the start of the Latin Empire's rule of Constantinople, which lasted for the next sixty years.[33] Francis of Assisi[edit] In 1209, Francis of Assisi led his first eleven followers to Rome to seek permission from Pope Innocent III to found a new religious order which was ultimately granted.[34] Upon entry to Rome, the brothers encountered Bishop Guido of Assisi, who had in his company Giovanni di San Paolo, the Cardinal-Bishop of Sabina. The cardinal, who was the confessor of Pope Innocent III, was immediately sympathetic to Francis and agreed to represent Francis to the pope. Reluctantly, Pope Innocent agreed to meet with Francis and the brothers the next day. After several days, the pope agreed to admit the group informally, adding that when God increased the group in grace and number, they could return for an official admittance. The group was tonsured.[35] This was important in part because it recognized Church authority and protected his followers from possible accusations of heresy, as had happened to the Waldensians decades earlier. Though Pope Innocent initially had his doubts, following a dream in which he saw Francis holding up the Basilica of St. John Lateran (the cathedral of Rome, thus the 'home church' of all Christendom), he decided to endorse Francis's order. This occurred, according to tradition, on 16 April 1210, and constituted the official founding of the Franciscan Order. The group, then the "Lesser Brothers" (Order of Friars Minor also known as the Franciscan Order), preached on the streets and had no possessions. They were centered in Porziuncola and preached first in Umbria, before expanding throughout Italy.[36] Other religious orders[edit] The lesser religious orders which Pope Innocent III approved are the Hospitallers of the Holy Ghost on 23 April 1198, the Trinitarians on 17 December 1198, and the Humiliati, in June, 1201. Fourth Council of the Lateran[edit] On 15 November 1215, Pope Innocent III convened the Fourth Lateran Council which was considered to be the most important Church council of the Middle Ages. By its conclusion, it issued seventy reformatory decrees. Among other things, it encouraged creating schools and holding clergy to a higher standard than the laity. Canon 18 forbade clergymen to participate in the practice of the judicial ordeal, effectively banning its use.[37] In order to define fundamental doctrines, the council reviewed the nature of the Holy Eucharist, the ordered annual confession of sins, and prescribed detailed procedures for the election of bishops. The council also mandated a strict lifestyle for clergy. Canon 68 states: Jews and Muslims shall wear a special dress to enable them to be distinguished from Christians so that no Christian shall come to marry them ignorant of who they are.[38] Canon 69 forbade "that Jews be given preferment in public office since this offers them the pretext to vent their wrath against the Christians."[39] It assumes that Jews blaspheme Christ, and therefore, as it would be "too absurd for a blasphemer of Christ to exercise power over Christians",[40] Jews should not be appointed to public offices. Death and legacy[edit] Innocent III honored by the U.S. House of Representatives The Council had set the beginning of the Fifth Crusade for 1217, under the direct leadership of the Church. After the Council, in the spring of 1216, Innocent moved to northern Italy in an attempt to reconcile the maritime cities of Pisa and Genoa by removing the excommunication cast over Pisa by his predecessor Celestine III and concluding a pact with Genoa.[41] Innocent III, however, died suddenly at Perugia[3] on 16 June 1216. He was buried in the cathedral of Perugia, where his body remained until Pope Leo XIII had it transferred to the Lateran in December 1891.[3] After his death, Innocent III was believed to be in purgatory. He is said to have appeared to St. Lutgarda in her monastery at Aywieres in Brabant. Engulfed in flames, he declared to her, “I am Pope Innocent”. He continued to explain that he was in purgatory for three faults which had caused him to arrive in this state, the first was never having wanted to bow his head during the recitation of the Nicene Creed as a sign of humility, the other two were not reported. Innocent asked St. Lutgarda to come to his assistance, saying, “Alas! It is terrible; and will last for centuries if you do not come to my assistance. In the name of Mary, who has obtained for me the favour of appealing to you, help me!” At that moment he disappeared and St. Lutgarda informed her sisters of what she had seen as Innocent had asked her to redouble her prayers and penances to free him from purgatory before the consummation of the world. St. Lutgardis heeded his plea and years later he reappeared to her resplendent in glory to thank her for obtaining his release from purgatory. Despite this, he is not officially canonized by the Catholic Church.[42][43] Innocent is one of two popes (the other being Gregory IX) among the 23 historical figures depicted in marble relief portraits above the gallery doors of the U.S. House of Representatives in honor of their influence on the development of American law.[44] Works[edit] His Latin works include De miseria humanae conditionis, a tract on asceticism that Innocent III wrote before becoming pope, and De sacro altaris mysterio, a description and exegesis of the liturgy.[9] "On Heresy: Letter to the Archbishop of Auch, 1198" "On Usury: Letter to the French bishops, 1198" "On Church Independence/Tithes: Letter to a bishop, 1198" "On the crusade and Trade with Saracens: Letter to the Venetians, 1198" "On Jews: Decree of 1199"[19] See also[edit] Biography portal Christianity portal History portal Italy portal List of popes Cardinals created by Innocent III References[edit] ^ "Pope Innocent III (Lotario dei conti di Segni) [Catholic-Hierarchy]". www.catholic-hierarchy.org. Retrieved 6 January 2021. ^ Moore, John (2003). Pope Innocent III (1160/61 – 1216): To Root Up and to Plant. Leiden, Boston: Brill. pp. 102–134. ISBN 90-04-12925-1. ^ a b c d e f g h "Catholic Encyclopedia: Pope Innocent III". Newadvent.org. 1 October 1910. Retrieved 17 February 2010. ^ Jane Sayers, Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1199–1216 London 1994, p. 16 ^ Jane Sayers, Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1199–1216 London 1994, p. 17 ^ Jane Sayers, Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1199–1216 London 1994, p. 18 ^ Jane Sayers, Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1199–1216 London 1994, p. 21 ^ Innocentius III. On the misery of the human condition, De miseria humane conditions. Open Library. OL 21246851M. ^ a b Moore, John C. (1981). "Innocent III's 'De Miseria Humanae Conditions: A Speculum Curiae?'". The Catholic Historical Review. 67 (4): 553–564. JSTOR 25021212. ^ "LOTARIO DEI CONTI DEI SEGNI [POPE INNOCENT III], De miseria humanae conditionis [On the Misery of Human Condition] In Latin, manuscript on parchment likely Italy, c. 1250" (PDF). Les Enluminures, Ltd. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 May 2013. Retrieved 13 January 2011. ^ Schmitt, C. B. (1988). The Cambridge history of Renaissance. ISBN 9780521397483. Retrieved 17 February 2010 – via Google Books. ^ See Julien Théry-Astruc, "Introduction", in Innocent III et le Midi (Cahiers de Fanjeaux, 50), Toulouse, Privat, 2015, pp. 11–35, at pp. 13–14. ^ Civilization in the West, Kishlansky, Geary, O'Brien, Volume A to 1500, Seventh Edition, p. 278 ^ Medieval Sourcebook: Innocent III: Letters on Papal Polices. Fordham.edu ^ a b Muldoon, James. Empire and Order, Springer, 1999, p. 81 ISBN 9780230512238 ^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Pope Innocent III". www.newadvent.org. Retrieved 6 January 2021. ^ Comyn, p. 275 ^ Bryce, p. 206 ^ a b Medieval Sourcebook: Innocent III: Letters on Papal Polices. Fordham.edu ^ a b Comyn, p. 277 ^ "Innocent, III". Encyclopedia of World Biography. 1998 – via Gale. (registration required) ^ a b Powell, James M. Innocent III: Vicar of Christ or Lord of the World? Washington: Catholic University of American Press, 2nd ed., 1994. ISBN 0-8132-0783-5 ^ "Diplomatarium Norvegicum". ^ "Magna Carta: people and society". British Library. Retrieved 23 January 2017. ^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Pope Innocent III". www.newadvent.org. Retrieved 6 January 2021. ^ a b c d Cheney, Christopher R. (1976). Innocent III and England. Stuttgart: Anton Hiersemann. ^ Packard, Sidney Raymond (1927). Europe and the Church under Innocent III. New York: H. Holt. ^ Innocent III, Pope (1969). On the Misery of the Human Condition. De Miseria Humane Conditionis, trans. Donald Roy Howard. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. ^ a b Clayton, Joseph (1941). Pope Innocent III and His Times. Milwaukee: Bruce Pub. ^ Migne, Jacques Paul (1849–1855). Patrologia Latina. Vol. 214–217. Paris: S.I. ^ Villhardouin, Geoffrey De (1908). Memoirs or Chronicle of the Fourth Crusade and The Conquest of Constantinople, trans. Frank T. Marzials. London: J.M. Dent. ^ Elliott-Binns, Leonard (1931). Innocent III. Hamden, Conn: Archon. ^ Roscher, Helmut (1969). Papst Innocenz III. Und Die Kreuzzuge. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck U. Ruprecht. ^ St. Francis of Assisi by G.K. Chesterton (1924), pp. 107–108 ^ Galli (2002), pp. 74–80 ^ Robinson, Paschal. "St. Francis of Assisi." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 6. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1909. 16 December 2018 ^ "Pennington, Kenneth. "The Fourth Lateran Council, its Legislation, and the Development of Legal Procedure", CUA" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 March 2016. Retrieved 17 December 2018. ^ "Church Councils – JewishEncyclopedia.com". www.jewishencyclopedia.com. Retrieved 26 July 2020. ^ "Medieval Sourcebook: Twelfth Ecumenical Council: Lateran IV 1215". Fordham.edu. Retrieved 17 February 2010. ^ "Lateran 4 – 1215". ^ "School of Theology". Sthweb.bu.edu. 2 September 2009. Archived from the original on 3 July 2009. Retrieved 17 February 2010. ^ Schouppe, Fr. F.X., Purgatory. TAN, 2005 ^ "Fr. Hardon Archives – St. Robert Bellarmine, Doctor of the Church". www.therealpresence.org. Retrieved 4 December 2020. ^ "Innocent III". Architect of the Capitol. Retrieved 14 April 2020. Sources[edit] (in Italian and Latin) Constitutiones Concilii quarti lateranensis – Costituzioni del quarto Concilio lateranense, ed. by di M. Albertazzi, La Finestra editrice, Lavis 2016. Barraclough, Geoffrey (1968). The Medieval Papacy. London: Thames and Hudson. Bolton, Brenda, Innocent III. Studies on Papal Authority and Pastoral Care, Variorum, "Collected Studies Series", Aldershot, 1995. The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume VIII. Published 1910. New York: Robert Appleton Company. (in Italian) Maccarrone, Michele (ed.), Chiesa e Stato nella dottrina di papa Innocenzo III, Roma: Ateneo lateranense, 1941. (in Italian) Maccarone, Michele, Studi su Innocenzo III, Padoue, 1972. (in Italian) Maccarone, Michele, Nuovi studi su Innocenzo III, éd. Roberto Lambertini, Rome, Istituto storico italiano per il Medio Evo, 1995. (in German) Maleczek, Werner, Papst und Kardinalskolleg von 1191 bis 1216, Wien, 1984. Moore, John C. "Pope Innocent III, Sardinia, and the Papal State." Speculum, Vol. 62, No. 1. (Jan. 1987), pp. 81–101. doi:10.2307/2852567. JSTOR 2852567. Moore, John C. Pope Innocent III (1160/61–1216): To Root Up and to Plant. Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2003; Notre Dame IN: U. of N.D. Press, 2009 (pb, lacking illustrations). Powell, James M., Innocent III: Vicar of Christ or Lord of the World? 2nd ed.(Washington: Catholic University of American Press, 1994). Sayers, Janet E. Innocent III: Leader of Europe 1198–1216, London, New York, Longman (The Medieval World), 1994. Smith, Damian J. (2017) [2004]. Innocent III and the Crown of Aragon: The Limits of Papal Authority. New York: Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-351-92743-7. (in Italian, French, and German) Andrea Sommerlechner, Andrea (dir.), Innocenzo III. Urbs et Orbis, Rome, Istituto storico italiano per il Medio Evo, 2003, 2 vol. Tillman, Helen, Pope Innocent III, New York, 1980. (in French) Théry-Astruc, Julien, "Introduction", in Innocent III et le Midi (Cahiers de Fanjeaux, 50), Toulouse, Privat, 2015, pp. 11–35. Further reading[edit] Kendall, Keith. "'Mute Dogs, Unable to Bark': Innocent III's Call to Combat Heresy." In Medieval Church Law and the Origins of the Western Legal Tradition: A Tribute to Kenneth Pennington, edited by Wolfgang P. Müller and Mary E. Sommar, 170–178. Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press, 2006. Kendall, Keith. "Sermons of Pope Innocent III: The 'Moral Theology' of a Pastor and Pope." PhD diss., University of Syracuse, 2003. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Innocentius III. Wikiquote has quotations related to: Pope Innocent III Wikisource has original works written by or about: Innocent III INNOCENT III THE GREAT. AN ESSAY ON HIS LIFE AND TIMES. BY C. H. C. PIRIE-GORDON (btm format) Pope Innocent III at Find a Grave Innocent III at the Catholic Encyclopedia Adrian Fletcher's Paradoxplace – Portrait (Subiaco) and Tomb (Lateran) of Innocent III Innocent III's Opera Omnia Cambridge History of Renassiance Philosophy History Medren Ecole Glossary Crusades Lateran Council Pope Innocent III and the Marks of a Great Papacy, article at Catholicism.org TRACES OF THE BOGOMIL MOVEMENT IN ENGLISH Pope Innocent III at the British Library Literature by and about Innozenz III. in the German National Library catalogue Works by and about Pope Innocent III in the Deutsche Digitale Bibliothek (German Digital Library) "Innocentius III papa". Repertorium "Historical Sources of the German Middle Ages" (Geschichtsquellen des deutschen Mittelalters). Meister Eckhart und seine Zeit – Päpste – Innozenz III. Complete works by Migne Patrologia Latina mit Inhaltsverzeichnis Deed by Innocence III for the Stendal Cathedral Chapter, 6 May 1206, "digitalised image". Photograph Archive of Old Original Documents (Lichtbildarchiv älterer Originalurkunden). University of Marburg. Catholic Church titles Preceded by Celestine III Pope 1198–1216 Succeeded by Honorius III v t e Popes of the Catholic Church List of popes graphical canonised Papal names Tombs extant non-extant Antipope Pope emeritus papal resignation Pope-elect 1st–4th centuries During the Roman Empire (until 493) including under Constantine (312–337) Peter Linus Anacletus Clement I Evaristus Alexander I Sixtus I Telesphorus Hyginus Pius I Anicetus Soter Eleutherius Victor I Zephyrinus Callixtus I Urban I Pontian Anterus Fabian Cornelius Lucius I Stephen I Sixtus II Dionysius Felix I Eutychian Caius Marcellinus Marcellus I Eusebius Miltiades Sylvester I Mark Julius I Liberius Damasus I Siricius Anastasius I 5th–8th centuries Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537) Byzantine Papacy (537–752) Frankish Papacy (756–857) Innocent I Zosimus Boniface I Celestine I Sixtus III Leo I Hilarius Simplicius Felix III Gelasius I Anastasius II Symmachus Hormisdas John I Felix IV Boniface II John II Agapetus I Silverius Vigilius Pelagius I John III Benedict I Pelagius II Gregory I Sabinian Boniface III Boniface IV Adeodatus I Boniface V Honorius I Severinus John IV Theodore I Martin I Eugene I Vitalian Adeodatus II Donus Agatho Leo II Benedict II John V Conon Sergius I John VI John VII Sisinnius Constantine Gregory II Gregory III Zachary Stephen II Paul I Stephen III Adrian I Leo III 9th–12th centuries Papal selection before 1059 Saeculum obscurum (904–964) Crescentii era (974–1012) Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044/1048) Imperial Papacy (1048–1257) Stephen IV Paschal I Eugene II Valentine Gregory IV Sergius II Leo IV Benedict III Nicholas I Adrian II John VIII Marinus I Adrian III Stephen V Formosus Boniface VI Stephen VI Romanus Theodore II John IX Benedict IV Leo V Sergius III Anastasius III Lando John X Leo VI Stephen VII John XI Leo VII Stephen VIII Marinus II Agapetus II John XII Benedict V Leo VIII John XIII Benedict VI Benedict VII John XIV John XV Gregory V Sylvester II John XVII John XVIII Sergius IV Benedict VIII John XIX Benedict IX Sylvester III Gregory VI Clement II Damasus II Leo IX Victor II Stephen IX Nicholas II Alexander II Gregory VII Victor III Urban II Paschal II Gelasius II Callixtus II Honorius II Innocent II Celestine II Lucius II Eugene III Anastasius IV Adrian IV Alexander III Lucius III Urban III Gregory VIII Clement III Celestine III Innocent III 13th–16th centuries Viterbo (1257–1281) Orvieto (1262–1297) Perugia (1228–1304) Avignon Papacy (1309–1378) Western Schism (1378–1417) Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534) Reformation Papacy (1534–1585) Baroque Papacy (1585–1689) Honorius III Gregory IX Celestine IV Innocent IV Alexander IV Urban IV Clement IV Gregory X Innocent V Adrian V John XXI Nicholas III Martin IV Honorius IV Nicholas IV Celestine V Boniface VIII Benedict XI Clement V John XXII Benedict XII Clement VI Innocent VI Urban V Gregory XI Urban VI Boniface IX Innocent VII Gregory XII Martin V Eugene IV Nicholas V Callixtus III Pius II Paul II Sixtus IV Innocent VIII Alexander VI Pius III Julius II Leo X Adrian VI Clement VII Paul III Julius III Marcellus II Paul IV Pius IV Pius V Gregory XIII Sixtus V Urban VII Gregory XIV Innocent IX Clement VIII 17th–21st centuries Age of Enlightenment (c. 1640–1740) Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848) Roman Question (1870–1929) Vatican City (1929–present) Leo XI Paul V Gregory XV Urban VIII Innocent X Alexander VII Clement IX Clement X Innocent XI Alexander VIII Innocent XII Clement XI Innocent XIII Benedict XIII Clement XII Benedict XIV Clement XIII Clement XIV Pius VI Pius VII Leo XII Pius VIII Gregory XVI Pius IX Leo XIII Pius X Benedict XV Pius XI Pius XII John XXIII Paul VI John Paul I John Paul II Benedict XVI Francis History of the papacy Antiquity and Early Middle Ages During the Roman Empire (until 493) Under Constantine (312–337) Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537) Byzantine Papacy (537–752) Frankish Papacy (756–857) Saeculum obscurum (904–964) Crescentii era (974–1012) High and Late Middle Ages Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044 / 1048) Imperial Papacy (1048–1257) Wandering Papacy Viterbo, 1257–1281 Orvieto, 1262–1297 Perugia, 1228–1304 Avignon Papacy (1309–1378) Western Schism (1378–1417) Early Modern and Modern Era Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534) Reformation Papacy (1534–1585) Baroque Papacy (1585–1689) Age of Enlightenment (c. 1640–1740) Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848) Roman Question (1870–1929) Vatican City (1929–present) World War II (1939–1945) Cold War (1945–1992) Category Catholic Church Portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History (Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal) Early Church Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church fathers Apostolic fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene Period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology (Bible Tradition; Catechism) General God Trinity Kingdom Body and soul Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks Catholic Infallibility Corporis Christi One true church People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation (Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country) Holy See (List of popes) Pope Francis Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity (Holy orders) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious: Superior Abbot, Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand Master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Liturgical rites Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire West Syriac Malankara Culture Art Marian Artists Authors Church buildings Altarpieces Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Polyglot Press L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders, institutes, societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptorists Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities  Catholic Church portal Category v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380-451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Islamic conquests Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Reformation Catholic Reformation Reformation Catholic Reformation Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine Thirty Years' War Baroque Period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII Consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazism Pope John XXIII Second Vatican Council Pope Paul VI Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa Communism Pope John Paul II World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis COVID-19 pandemic  Vatican City portal  Catholicism portal Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) ISNI 1 VIAF 1 WorldCat National libraries Norway Chile Spain 2 France (data) Catalonia Italy United States Japan Czech Republic Australia Greece Israel Croatia Netherlands Poland Sweden Vatican Art research institutes Artist Names (Getty) Other Faceted Application of Subject Terminology RISM (France) 1 RERO (Switzerland) 1 2 Social Networks and Archival Context SUDOC (France) 1 Trove (Australia) 1 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pope_Innocent_III&oldid=1055873922" Categories: Pope Innocent III 1160s births 1216 deaths 12th-century apocalypticists 12th-century Latin writers 12th-century popes 12th-century Italian cardinals 13th-century apocalypticists 13th-century popes Conti di Segni Cardinal-nephews Christians of the Fifth Crusade Christians of the Fourth Crusade Christians of the Livonian Crusade Italian popes People from the Metropolitan City of Rome Capital People of the Albigensian Crusade Trinitarians 12th-century Italian jurists Hidden categories: CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty Pages with login required references or sources Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 Pages using ordination template and denomination parameter Pages with template ordination embedded Articles containing Latin-language text NPOV disputes from September 2021 All NPOV disputes All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2018 Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with French-language sources (fr) Commons link from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNC identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with CANTIC identifiers Articles with ICCU identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NLI identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with SELIBR identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with RISM identifiers Articles with RERO identifiers Articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with WORLDCATID identifiers AC with 28 elements Articles with multiple identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Languages Afrikaans ??????? Aragonés Asturianu Az?rbaycanca Bân-lâm-gú ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Gaeilge Galego ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Malagasy ????? ???? Mìng-d??ng-ng?? Nederlands ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Winaray ?? Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 18 November 2021, at 09:36 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement