https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Philip Arnold Heseltine (30 October 1894 – 17 December 1930), known by the pseudonym Peter Warlock, was a British composer and music critic. The Warlock name, which reflects Heseltine's interest in occult practices, was used for all his published musical works. He is best known as a composer of songs and other vocal music; he also achieved notoriety in his lifetime through his unconventional and often scandalous lifestyle. As a schoolboy at Eton College, Heseltine met the British composer Frederick Delius, with whom he formed a close friendship. After a failed student career in Oxford and London, Heseltine turned to musical journalism, while developing interests in folk-song and Elizabethan music. His first serious compositions date from around 1915. Following a period of inactivity, a positive and lasting influence on his work arose from his meeting in 1916 with the Dutch composer Bernard van Dieren; he also gained creative impetus from a year spent in Ireland, studying Celtic culture and language. On his return to England in 1918, Heseltine began composing songs in a distinctive, original style, while building a reputation as a combative and controversial music critic. During 1920–21 he edited the music magazine The Sackbut. His most prolific period as a composer came in the 1920s, when he was based first in Wales and later at Eynsford in Kent. (Full article...) Image 2 Henry Conwell (c.?1748 – 22 April 1842) was an Irish-born Catholic bishop in the United States. He became a priest in 1776 and served in that capacity in Ireland for more than four decades. After the Pope declined to appoint him Archbishop of Armagh, the diocese in which he served as Vicar General, he was instead installed as the second Bishop of Philadelphia in 1819. Conwell took up the post at an advanced age and spent much of his time there feuding with the lay trustees of his parishes, especially those of St. Mary's Church in Philadelphia. When Conwell removed and excommunicated William Hogan, a controversial priest at St. Mary's, the parish trustees instead rejected Conwell's authority, creating a minor schism. The two sides partially reconciled by 1826, but the Vatican hierarchy believed Conwell had ceded too much power to the laymen in the process and recalled him to Rome. (Full article...) Image 3 Bowie in 2002 David Robert Jones OAL (8 January 1947 – 10 January 2016), known professionally as David Bowie (/?bo?i/ BOH-ee), was an English singer-songwriter and actor. A leading figure in the music industry, Bowie is regarded as one of the most influential musicians of the 20th century. He was acclaimed by critics and musicians, particularly for his innovative work during the 1970s. His career was marked by reinvention and visual presentation, and his music and stagecraft had a significant impact on popular music. Bowie developed an interest in music as a child. He studied art, music and design before embarking on a professional career as a musician in 1963. "Space Oddity", released in 1969, was his first top-five entry on the UK Singles Chart. After a period of experimentation, he re-emerged in 1972 during the glam rock era with his flamboyant and androgynous alter ego Ziggy Stardust. The character was spearheaded by the success of Bowie's single "Starman" and album The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars, which won him widespread popularity. In 1975, Bowie's style shifted towards a sound he characterised as "plastic soul", initially alienating many of his UK fans but garnering him his first major US crossover success with the number-one single "Fame" and the album Young Americans. In 1976, Bowie starred in the cult film The Man Who Fell to Earth, directed by Nicolas Roeg, and released Station to Station. In 1977, he further confounded expectations with the electronic-inflected album Low, the first of three collaborations with Brian Eno that came to be known as the "Berlin Trilogy". "Heroes" (1977) and Lodger (1979) followed; each album reached the UK top five and received lasting critical praise. (Full article...) Image 4 Photograph by Alexander Bassano, 1882 Victoria (Alexandrina Victoria; 24 May 1819 – 22 January 1901) was Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland from 20 June 1837 until her death in 1901. Known as the Victorian era, her reign of 63 years and seven months was longer than any previous British monarch. It was a period of industrial, political, scientific, and military change within the United Kingdom, and was marked by a great expansion of the British Empire. In 1876, the British Parliament voted to grant her the additional title of Empress of India. Victoria was the daughter of Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn (the fourth son of King George III), and Princess Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld. After the deaths of her father and grandfather in 1820, she was raised under close supervision by her mother and her comptroller, John Conroy. She inherited the throne aged 18 after her father's three elder brothers died without surviving legitimate issue. Though a constitutional monarch, privately, Victoria attempted to influence government policy and ministerial appointments; publicly, she became a national icon who was identified with strict standards of personal morality. (Full article...) Image 5 Georgette Heyer (/?he?.?r/; 16 August 1902 – 4 July 1974) was an English novelist and short-story writer, in both the regency romance and detective fiction genres. Her writing career began in 1921, when she turned a story for her younger brother into the novel The Black Moth. In 1925 Heyer married George Ronald Rougier, a mining engineer. The couple spent several years living in Tanganyika Territory and Macedonia before returning to England in 1929. After her novel These Old Shades became popular despite its release during the General Strike, Heyer determined that publicity was not necessary for good sales. For the rest of her life she refused to grant interviews, telling a friend: "My private life concerns no one but myself and my family." Heyer essentially established the historical romance genre and its subgenre Regency romance. Her Regencies were inspired by Jane Austen. To ensure accuracy, Heyer collected reference works and kept detailed notes on all aspects of Regency life. Whilst some critics thought the novels were too detailed, others considered the level of detail to be Heyer's greatest asset. Her meticulous nature was also evident in her historical novels; Heyer even recreated William the Conqueror's crossing into England for her novel The Conqueror. (Full article...) Image 6 Sorkin in 2016 Aaron Benjamin Sorkin (born June 9, 1961) is an American playwright, screenwriter, actor, television writer, television producer, and film director. Born in New York City, Sorkin developed a passion for writing at an early age. His works include the Broadway plays A Few Good Men, The Farnsworth Invention, and To Kill a Mockingbird, as well as the television series Sports Night (1998–2000), The West Wing (1999–2006), Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip (2006–07), and The Newsroom (2012–14). He wrote the film screenplay for the legal drama A Few Good Men (1992), the comedy The American President (1995), and several biopics including Charlie Wilson's War (2007), Moneyball (2011), and Steve Jobs (2015). For writing 2010's The Social Network, he won an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay and Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay. He made his feature film debut as a director in 2017 with the crime drama Molly's Game, which garnered mostly positive reviews and earned him a third Academy Award nomination for Best Adapted Screenplay. Sorkin's follow-up directorial film was the historical legal drama The Trial of the Chicago 7 (2020) which earned 6 Oscar nominations including Best Original Screenplay. As a writer, Sorkin is recognized for his trademark fast-paced dialogue and extended monologues, complemented by frequent collaborator Thomas Schlamme's storytelling technique called the "walk and talk". These sequences consist of single tracking shots of long duration involving multiple characters engaging in conversation as they move through the set; characters enter and exit the conversation as the shot continues without any cuts. (Full article...) Image 7 Feynman c. 1965 Richard Phillips Feynman (/?fa?nm?n/; May 11, 1918 – February 15, 1988) was an American theoretical physicist, known for his work in the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics, the theory of quantum electrodynamics, the physics of the superfluidity of supercooled liquid helium, as well as his work in particle physics for which he proposed the parton model. For contributions to the development of quantum electrodynamics, Feynman received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1965 jointly with Julian Schwinger and Shin'ichir? Tomonaga. Feynman developed a widely used pictorial representation scheme for the mathematical expressions describing the behavior of subatomic particles, which later became known as Feynman diagrams. During his lifetime, Feynman became one of the best-known scientists in the world. In a 1999 poll of 130 leading physicists worldwide by the British journal Physics World, he was ranked the seventh-greatest physicist of all time. (Full article...) Image 8 Marcus Edward Trescothick MBE (born 25 December 1975) is an English former cricketer who played first-class cricket for Somerset County Cricket Club, and represented England in 76 Test matches and 123 One Day Internationals. He was Somerset captain from 2010-16 and temporary England captain for several Tests and ODIs. A left-handed opening batsman, he made his first-class debut for Somerset in 1993 and quickly established himself as a regular member of the team. Trescothick made his One Day International (ODI) debut seven years later, against Zimbabwe in July 2000. His Test debut, against the West Indies, followed in August. Although former England captain Nasser Hussain likened Trescothick's build and batting temperament to that of Graham Gooch, his stroke play is more reminiscent of David Gower. (Full article...) Image 9 Harrison at the White House in December 1974 George Harrison MBE (25 February 1943 – 29 November 2001) was an English musician, singer-songwriter, and music and film producer who achieved international fame as the lead guitarist of the Beatles. Sometimes called "the quiet Beatle", Harrison embraced Indian culture and helped broaden the scope of popular music through his incorporation of Indian instrumentation and Hindu-aligned spirituality in the Beatles' work. Although the majority of the band's songs were written by John Lennon and Paul McCartney, most Beatles albums from 1965 onwards contained at least two Harrison compositions. His songs for the group include "Taxman", "Within You Without You", "While My Guitar Gently Weeps", "Here Comes the Sun" and "Something". Harrison's earliest musical influences included George Formby and Django Reinhardt; Carl Perkins, Chet Atkins and Chuck Berry were subsequent influences. By 1965, he had begun to lead the Beatles into folk rock through his interest in Bob Dylan and the Byrds, and towards Indian classical music through his use of the sitar on "Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)". Having initiated the band's embracing of Transcendental Meditation in 1967, he subsequently developed an association with the Hare Krishna movement. After the band's break-up in 1970, Harrison released the triple album All Things Must Pass, a critically acclaimed work that produced his most successful hit single, "My Sweet Lord", and introduced his signature sound as a solo artist, the slide guitar. He also organised the 1971 Concert for Bangladesh with Indian musician Ravi Shankar, a precursor to later benefit concerts such as Live Aid. In his role as a music and film producer, Harrison produced acts signed to the Beatles' Apple record label before founding Dark Horse Records in 1974 and co-founding HandMade Films in 1978. (Full article...) Image 10 Yao with the Houston Rockets in 2006 Yao Ming (Chinese: ??; born September 12, 1980) is a Chinese basketball executive and former professional player. He played for the Shanghai Sharks of the Chinese Basketball Association (CBA) and the Houston Rockets of the National Basketball Association (NBA). Yao was selected to start for the Western Conference in the NBA All-Star Game eight times, and was named to the All-NBA Team five times. During his final season, he was the tallest active player in the NBA, at 2.29 m (7 ft 6 in). Yao, who was born in Shanghai, started playing for the Sharks as a teenager, and played on their senior team for five years in the CBA, winning a championship in his final year. After negotiating with the CBA and the Sharks to secure his release, Yao was selected by the Rockets as the first overall pick in the 2002 NBA draft. He reached the NBA playoffs four times, and the Rockets won the first-round series in the 2009 postseason, their first playoff series victory since 1997. In July 2011, Yao announced his retirement from professional basketball because of a series of foot and ankle injuries which forced him to miss 250 games in his last six seasons. In eight seasons with the Rockets, Yao ranks sixth among franchise leaders in total points and total rebounds, and second in total blocks. (Full article...) Image 11 Mary Wollstonecraft by John Opie, c.?1797 Mary Wollstonecraft (UK: /?w?lst?nkr??ft/, /-kræft/; 27 April 1759 – 10 September 1797) was an English writer, philosopher, and advocate of women's rights. Until the late 20th century, Wollstonecraft's life, which encompassed several unconventional personal relationships at the time, received more attention than her writing. Today Wollstonecraft is regarded as one of the founding feminist philosophers, and feminists often cite both her life and her works as important influences. During her brief career, she wrote novels, treatises, a travel narrative, a history of the French Revolution, a conduct book, and a children's book. Wollstonecraft is best known for A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792), in which she argues that women are not naturally inferior to men, but appear to be only because they lack education. She suggests that both men and women should be treated as rational beings and imagines a social order founded on reason. (Full article...) Image 12 Douglas Albert Munro (October 11, 1919 – September 27, 1942) was a United States Coast Guardsman who was posthumously decorated with the Medal of Honor for an act of "extraordinary heroism" during World War II. He is the only person to have received the medal for actions performed during service in the Coast Guard. Munro was born in Canada to an American father and a British mother, and his family moved to the United States when he was a child. He was raised in South Cle Elum, Washington, and attended Central Washington College of Education before volunteering for military service shortly before the United States entered World War II. Munro and his shipmate Raymond Evans were known as the Gold Dust Twins, so-called because they were inseparable. (Full article...) Image 13 Mellitus (died 24 April 624) was the first bishop of London in the Saxon period, the third Archbishop of Canterbury, and a member of the Gregorian mission sent to England to convert the Anglo-Saxons from their native paganism to Christianity. He arrived in 601 AD with a group of clergy sent to augment the mission, and was consecrated as Bishop of London in 604. Mellitus was the recipient of a famous letter from Pope Gregory I known as the Epistola ad Mellitum, preserved in a later work by the medieval chronicler Bede, which suggested the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons be undertaken gradually, integrating pagan rituals and customs. In 610, Mellitus returned to Italy to attend a council of bishops, and returned to England bearing papal letters to some of the missionaries. Mellitus was exiled from London by the pagan successors to his patron, King Sæberht of Essex, following the latter's death around 616. King Æthelberht of Kent, Mellitus' other patron, died at about the same time, forcing him to take refuge in Gaul. Mellitus returned to England the following year, after Æthelberht's successor had been converted to Christianity, but he was unable to return to London, whose inhabitants remained pagan. Mellitus was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury in 619. During his tenure, he was alleged to have miraculously saved the cathedral, and much of the town of Canterbury, from a fire. After his death in 624, Mellitus was revered as a saint. (Full article...) Image 14 Dannatt in September 2007 General Francis Richard Dannatt, Baron Dannatt, GCB, CBE, MC, DL (born 23 December 1950) is a retired senior British Army officer and member of the House of Lords. He was Chief of the General Staff (head of the Army) from 2006 to 2009. Dannatt was commissioned into the Green Howards in 1971, and his first tour of duty was in Belfast as a platoon commander. During his second tour of duty, also in Northern Ireland, Dannatt was awarded the Military Cross. Following a major stroke in 1977, Dannatt considered leaving the Army, but was encouraged by his commanding officer (CO) to stay. After Staff College, he became a company commander and eventually took command of the Green Howards in 1989. He attended and then commanded the Higher Command and Staff Course, after which he was promoted to brigadier. Dannatt was given command of 4th Armoured Brigade in 1994 and commanded the British component of the Implementation Force (IFOR) the following year. (Full article...) Image 15 Scott in 1971 David Randolph Scott (born June 6, 1932) is an American retired test pilot and NASA astronaut who was the seventh person to walk on the Moon. The commander of Apollo 15, Scott was selected as an astronaut as part of the third group in 1963. Scott flew to space three times, and is one of four surviving Moon walkers and the last surviving crew member of Apollo 15. Before becoming an astronaut, Scott graduated from the United States Military Academy at West Point and joined the Air Force. After serving as a fighter pilot in Europe, he graduated from the Air Force Experimental Test Pilot School (Class 62C) and the Aerospace Research Pilot School (Class IV). Scott retired from the Air Force in 1975 with the rank of colonel, and more than 5,600 hours of logged flying time. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that at the age of 12, the Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse became the youngest ever Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo Calf Pipe and Bundle? ... that in developing the Dictionary of Women Worldwide, editors Anne Commire and Deborah Klezmer found other biographical dictionaries often devoted only five percent of their text to women? ... that President Theodore Roosevelt described the declining birthrate of the United States as a form of "race suicide", citing a term coined by eugenicist Edward Alsworth Ross? ... that General Sir Charles Reid shot the celebrated, but probably not man-eating, Leeds Tiger? ... that despite being nearly illiterate, Chinese soldier Gao Yubao wrote an autobiographical novel that has had more than six million copies in print? ... that Eleanor Roosevelt wrote four autobiographical memoirs: This Is My Story (1937), This I Remember (1949), On My Own (1958), and The Autobiography of Eleanor Roosevelt (1961)? ... that the termite Macrotermes michaelseni is considered to be an ecosystem engineer in the Okavango Delta in Botswana? ... that Governor Andrew Cuomo, who was initially praised for his handling of the COVID-19 pandemic in New York, is now implicated in a scandal related to it? ... that the 1979 Salvadoran coup d'état overthrew President Carlos Humberto Romero? ... that Thomas Fritsch, a film actor who charmed the teens of the 1960s, was the German voice of Russell Crowe, Scar and Diego, a Smilodon? ... that as executor to the estate of Sir Sidney Herbert, one of Sir George Sidney Herbert's tasks was to ensure a locked tin box was "destroyed unopened by cremating"? ... that experimental musician John Olson has been called a "sort of bizarro influencer" because of his habit of "chaotic shitposting"? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 2Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 3Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 4Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 5John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 6James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 7Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Image 8A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Ngozi Okonjo-IwealaPhoto: International Monetary Fund Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala (b. 1954) is the current Finance Minister of Nigeria. An economist who earned her degrees at Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the United States, she also served as a managing director of the World Bank, and Foreign Minister of Nigeria. She is credited with bringing increased transparency to her country's government, as well as helping Nigeria obtain its first ever sovereign credit rating. Image 2 Raden SalehPainting: Friedrich Carl Albert Schreuel Raden Saleh (1811–1880) was a Romantic painter of Arab-Javanese ethnicity from the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia). Born in Semarang, in 1829 he was sent to the Netherlands to study portraiture and landscape painting under artists such as Cornelis Kruseman and Andreas Schelfhout. Upon returning to Java in 1851, Saleh focused predominantly on the day-to-day lives of the Javanese, although he also completed his magnum opus, The Arrest of Pangeran Diponegoro, in this period. This painting, though long thought to be a self-portrait, is now attributed to Friedrich Carl Albert Schreuel, a German artist whom Saleh knew during his time in Europe. Image 3 Lies NoorPhotograph credit: Djakartawood Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Lies Noor (c.?1938 – 1961) was an Indonesian actress. She first appeared on film in Pulang (Homecoming) in 1952, while she was still at school. She rose in popularity with a string of successful films, and was able to command high fees for her roles. In the mid-1950s, having married and had a child, she took a break from her career to care full-time for her son. After returning to acting in 1960, however, she developed encephalitis the next year and died in hospital two days later. This photograph of Noor was taken around 1956. Image 4 Donald PleasencePhoto: Allan Warren; Restoration: Peter Weis Donald Pleasence (1919–1995) was a British film, television and stage actor best known for his roles in You Only Live Twice, where he played James Bond's arch-enemy Dr Blofeld, and The Great Escape, where he drew upon his experience in a German POW camp. He was nominated four times for the Tony Award for best performance by a leading actor in a Broadway play, and made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire for his services to the acting profession by Queen Elizabeth II in 1994. Image 5 Mary of TeckPhoto credit: Bain News Service Mary of Teck was the queen consort of King George V as well as the Empress of India. Before her accession, she was successively Duchess of York, Duchess of Cornwall and Princess of Wales. By birth, she was a princess of Teck, in the Kingdom of Württemberg, with the style Her Serene Highness. To her family, she was informally known as May, after her birth month. Queen Mary was known for setting the tone of the British Royal Family, as a model of regal formality and propriety, especially during state occasions. She was the first Queen Consort to attend the coronation of her successors. Noted for superbly bejewelling herself for formal events, Queen Mary left a collection of jewels now considered priceless. Image 6 Alexz JohnsonPhoto: Epitome Pictures Alexz Johnson (b. 1986) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and actress, best known for roles as Jude Harrison in the CTV series Instant Star (character shown here), Annie Thelan in the Disney Channel series So Weird, and as Erin Ulmer in the 2006 horror film Final Destination 3. Her album Voodoo was released in 2010. Image 7 Jeremy DoylePhoto: Sport the Library Jeremy Doyle (1983–2011) was an Australian wheelchair basketball player. Left paraplegic after a car accident, he was classified as a 1 point player. While representing his country Doyle won two gold medals, first at the 2009 Paralympic World Cup and again at the 2010 Wheelchair Basketball World Championship. Image 8 Billy StrayhornPhotograph credit: William P. Gottlieb; restored by Adam Cuerden Billy Strayhorn (November 29, 1915 – May 31, 1967) was an American jazz composer, pianist, lyricist, and arranger, best remembered for his long-time collaboration with bandleader and composer Duke Ellington that lasted nearly three decades. Though classical music was Strayhorn's first love, his ambition to become a classical composer went unrealized because of the harsh reality of a black man trying to make his way in the world of classical music, which at that time was almost completely white. He was introduced to the music of pianists like Art Tatum and Teddy Wilson at age 19, and the artistic influence of these musicians guided him into the realm of jazz, where he remained for the rest of his life. This photograph of Strayhorn was taken by William P. Gottlieb in the 1940s. Image 9 T206 Honus WagnerImage credit: American Tobacco Company The T206 Honus Wagner is a rare baseball card depicting Honus Wagner (February 24, 1874 – December 6, 1955), a dead-ball era shortstop considered one of the best players of all time. The card was designed and issued by the American Tobacco Company from 1909 to 1911. Only 50 to 200 cards were ever distributed to the public, and as a result of the card's rarity and popularity, prices have soared. In 2007, a collector paid $2.8 million for one, making it the most valuable baseball card in history. This specimen belongs to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in Cooperstown, New York. Image 10 Morgan PresselPhotograph: Keith Allison; Edit: Brandmeister American professional golfer Morgan Pressel, who first qualified for the Women's Open at age 12. Pressel had her first victory in the Kraft Nabisco Championship in 2007. She made her first professional hole-in-one, an eagle, at that year's Jamie Farr Owens Corning Classic. Image 11 Rory KennedyPhotograph credit: Lyndie Benson Rory Kennedy (born December 12, 1968) is an American documentary filmmaker and the youngest child of U.S. senator Robert Kennedy and Ethel Skakel. Born six months after the assassination of her father, her life has seen many tragedies. As a director and producer, she has made documentary films that center on social issues such as addiction, nuclear radiation, the treatment of prisoners of war, and the politics of the Mexican border fence. Her films have been featured on many TV networks, and her 2014 documentary Last Days in Vietnam was nominated for an Academy Award. Image 12 Queen Wilhelmina and Princess Juliana of the NetherlandsPhoto credit: Bain News Service Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands with her daughter and successor Princess Juliana, circa 1914. Wilhelmina was queen regnant from 1890 to 1948, longer than any other Dutch monarch. Outside the Netherlands she is primarily remembered for her role in the Second World War, in which she proved to be a great inspiration to the Dutch resistance, as well as a prominent leader of the Dutch government in exile. Juliana became queen regnant in 1948 after her mother's abdication and ruled until her own abdication in 1980, succeeded by her daughter, Beatrix. Image 13 Maxim GorkyPhoto: Herman Mishkin; Restoration: Fallschirmjäger Maxim Gorky (1868–1936) was a Russian political activist and writer who helped establish the Socialist Realism literary method. This portrait dates from a trip Gorky made to the United States in 1906, on which he raised funds for the Bolsheviks. During this trip he wrote his novel The Mother. Image 14 Ida B. WellsPhotograph: Mary Garrity; restoration: Adam Cuerden Ida B. Wells (1862–1931) was an African-American journalist, newspaper editor, suffragist, sociologist, and an early leader in the civil rights movement. Born into slavery in Holly Springs, Mississippi, Wells and her family were freed by the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863. Despite losing her parents to yellow fever when she was sixteen, Wells attended Fisk University and became a teacher. Politically active since her youth, she also became a writer on race issues and campaigned against lynching; in this latter capacity she published two influential pamphlets and traveled throughout the United States and the United Kingdom. Wells also helped establish the National Association of Colored Women and the National Afro-American Council. Image 15 Peter Oliver (painter)Portrait: Peter Oliver An 8.8-centimetre (3.5 in) tall self-portrait of the English miniaturist Peter Oliver (1594–1648). He often worked with watercolours. edit  On this day – November 18 Births 1787 – Louis-Jacques Daguerre, French inventor and photographer (d. 1851) 1901 – George Gallup, American statistician and opinion pollster (d. 1984) 1908 – Imogene Coca, American actress and comedienne (d. 2001) 1923 – Alan Shepard, American astronaut (d. 1998) (pictured) 1939 – Margaret Atwood, Canadian writer 1968 – Owen Wilson, American actor Deaths 1886 – Chester A. Arthur, 21st President of the United States (b. 1829) 1922 – Marcel Proust, French novelist (b. 1871) 1962 – Niels Bohr, Danish physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1885) 1965 – Henry A. Wallace, Vice President of the United States (b. 1888) 1969 – Joseph P. Kennedy Sr., American politician (b. 1888) 2002 – James Coburn, American actor (b. 1928) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 16 November 2021 – The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) 15 November 2021 – China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) 10 November 2021 – Politics of Sweden Swedish Prime Minister Stefan Löfven resigns after seven years in office, although he will continue to remain in office ad interim until a new government is formed. Minister for Finance Magdalena Andersson, who succeeded Löfven as leader of the Social Democratic Party on November 4, is expected to become the first female prime minister in the country's history. (ABC News) 29 October 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Myanmar coup d'état U Win Htein, aide to the deposed Burmese leader Aung San Suu Kyi, is sentenced to 20 years in prison for sedition. Htein became the first politician arrested in the aftermath of the February 2021 coup to be convicted. (Deutsche Welle) 28 October 2021 – The new leader of the Islamic State – West Africa Province has been killed during a military operation this month, two weeks after the death of the group's leader Abu Musab al-Barnawi was announced. (Reuters) 27 October 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic Labour Party leader Keir Starmer tests positive for COVID-19. (The Guardian) Updated: 21:33, 17 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "I have but one passion: to enlighten those who have been kept in the dark, in the name of humanity which has suffered so much and is entitled to happiness. My fiery protest is simply the cry of my very soul." — Émile Zola In "J'accuse…!", L'Aurore 13 January 1898 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Doug Ring with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Philip Arnold Heseltine (30 October 1894 – 17 December 1930), known by the pseudonym Peter Warlock, was a British composer and music critic. The Warlock name, which reflects Heseltine's interest in occult practices, was used for all his published musical works. He is best known as a composer of songs and other vocal music; he also achieved notoriety in his lifetime through his unconventional and often scandalous lifestyle. As a schoolboy at Eton College, Heseltine met the British composer Frederick Delius, with whom he formed a close friendship. After a failed student career in Oxford and London, Heseltine turned to musical journalism, while developing interests in folk-song and Elizabethan music. His first serious compositions date from around 1915. Following a period of inactivity, a positive and lasting influence on his work arose from his meeting in 1916 with the Dutch composer Bernard van Dieren; he also gained creative impetus from a year spent in Ireland, studying Celtic culture and language. On his return to England in 1918, Heseltine began composing songs in a distinctive, original style, while building a reputation as a combative and controversial music critic. During 1920–21 he edited the music magazine The Sackbut. His most prolific period as a composer came in the 1920s, when he was based first in Wales and later at Eynsford in Kent. (Full article...) Image 2 Henry Conwell (c.?1748 – 22 April 1842) was an Irish-born Catholic bishop in the United States. He became a priest in 1776 and served in that capacity in Ireland for more than four decades. After the Pope declined to appoint him Archbishop of Armagh, the diocese in which he served as Vicar General, he was instead installed as the second Bishop of Philadelphia in 1819. Conwell took up the post at an advanced age and spent much of his time there feuding with the lay trustees of his parishes, especially those of St. Mary's Church in Philadelphia. When Conwell removed and excommunicated William Hogan, a controversial priest at St. Mary's, the parish trustees instead rejected Conwell's authority, creating a minor schism. The two sides partially reconciled by 1826, but the Vatican hierarchy believed Conwell had ceded too much power to the laymen in the process and recalled him to Rome. (Full article...) Image 3 Bowie in 2002 David Robert Jones OAL (8 January 1947 – 10 January 2016), known professionally as David Bowie (/?bo?i/ BOH-ee), was an English singer-songwriter and actor. A leading figure in the music industry, Bowie is regarded as one of the most influential musicians of the 20th century. He was acclaimed by critics and musicians, particularly for his innovative work during the 1970s. His career was marked by reinvention and visual presentation, and his music and stagecraft had a significant impact on popular music. Bowie developed an interest in music as a child. He studied art, music and design before embarking on a professional career as a musician in 1963. "Space Oddity", released in 1969, was his first top-five entry on the UK Singles Chart. After a period of experimentation, he re-emerged in 1972 during the glam rock era with his flamboyant and androgynous alter ego Ziggy Stardust. The character was spearheaded by the success of Bowie's single "Starman" and album The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars, which won him widespread popularity. In 1975, Bowie's style shifted towards a sound he characterised as "plastic soul", initially alienating many of his UK fans but garnering him his first major US crossover success with the number-one single "Fame" and the album Young Americans. In 1976, Bowie starred in the cult film The Man Who Fell to Earth, directed by Nicolas Roeg, and released Station to Station. In 1977, he further confounded expectations with the electronic-inflected album Low, the first of three collaborations with Brian Eno that came to be known as the "Berlin Trilogy". "Heroes" (1977) and Lodger (1979) followed; each album reached the UK top five and received lasting critical praise. (Full article...) Image 4 Photograph by Alexander Bassano, 1882 Victoria (Alexandrina Victoria; 24 May 1819 – 22 January 1901) was Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland from 20 June 1837 until her death in 1901. Known as the Victorian era, her reign of 63 years and seven months was longer than any previous British monarch. It was a period of industrial, political, scientific, and military change within the United Kingdom, and was marked by a great expansion of the British Empire. In 1876, the British Parliament voted to grant her the additional title of Empress of India. Victoria was the daughter of Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn (the fourth son of King George III), and Princess Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld. After the deaths of her father and grandfather in 1820, she was raised under close supervision by her mother and her comptroller, John Conroy. She inherited the throne aged 18 after her father's three elder brothers died without surviving legitimate issue. Though a constitutional monarch, privately, Victoria attempted to influence government policy and ministerial appointments; publicly, she became a national icon who was identified with strict standards of personal morality. (Full article...) Image 5 Georgette Heyer (/?he?.?r/; 16 August 1902 – 4 July 1974) was an English novelist and short-story writer, in both the regency romance and detective fiction genres. Her writing career began in 1921, when she turned a story for her younger brother into the novel The Black Moth. In 1925 Heyer married George Ronald Rougier, a mining engineer. The couple spent several years living in Tanganyika Territory and Macedonia before returning to England in 1929. After her novel These Old Shades became popular despite its release during the General Strike, Heyer determined that publicity was not necessary for good sales. For the rest of her life she refused to grant interviews, telling a friend: "My private life concerns no one but myself and my family." Heyer essentially established the historical romance genre and its subgenre Regency romance. Her Regencies were inspired by Jane Austen. To ensure accuracy, Heyer collected reference works and kept detailed notes on all aspects of Regency life. Whilst some critics thought the novels were too detailed, others considered the level of detail to be Heyer's greatest asset. Her meticulous nature was also evident in her historical novels; Heyer even recreated William the Conqueror's crossing into England for her novel The Conqueror. (Full article...) Image 6 Sorkin in 2016 Aaron Benjamin Sorkin (born June 9, 1961) is an American playwright, screenwriter, actor, television writer, television producer, and film director. Born in New York City, Sorkin developed a passion for writing at an early age. His works include the Broadway plays A Few Good Men, The Farnsworth Invention, and To Kill a Mockingbird, as well as the television series Sports Night (1998–2000), The West Wing (1999–2006), Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip (2006–07), and The Newsroom (2012–14). He wrote the film screenplay for the legal drama A Few Good Men (1992), the comedy The American President (1995), and several biopics including Charlie Wilson's War (2007), Moneyball (2011), and Steve Jobs (2015). For writing 2010's The Social Network, he won an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay and Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay. He made his feature film debut as a director in 2017 with the crime drama Molly's Game, which garnered mostly positive reviews and earned him a third Academy Award nomination for Best Adapted Screenplay. Sorkin's follow-up directorial film was the historical legal drama The Trial of the Chicago 7 (2020) which earned 6 Oscar nominations including Best Original Screenplay. As a writer, Sorkin is recognized for his trademark fast-paced dialogue and extended monologues, complemented by frequent collaborator Thomas Schlamme's storytelling technique called the "walk and talk". These sequences consist of single tracking shots of long duration involving multiple characters engaging in conversation as they move through the set; characters enter and exit the conversation as the shot continues without any cuts. (Full article...) Image 7 Feynman c. 1965 Richard Phillips Feynman (/?fa?nm?n/; May 11, 1918 – February 15, 1988) was an American theoretical physicist, known for his work in the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics, the theory of quantum electrodynamics, the physics of the superfluidity of supercooled liquid helium, as well as his work in particle physics for which he proposed the parton model. For contributions to the development of quantum electrodynamics, Feynman received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1965 jointly with Julian Schwinger and Shin'ichir? Tomonaga. Feynman developed a widely used pictorial representation scheme for the mathematical expressions describing the behavior of subatomic particles, which later became known as Feynman diagrams. During his lifetime, Feynman became one of the best-known scientists in the world. In a 1999 poll of 130 leading physicists worldwide by the British journal Physics World, he was ranked the seventh-greatest physicist of all time. (Full article...) Image 8 Marcus Edward Trescothick MBE (born 25 December 1975) is an English former cricketer who played first-class cricket for Somerset County Cricket Club, and represented England in 76 Test matches and 123 One Day Internationals. He was Somerset captain from 2010-16 and temporary England captain for several Tests and ODIs. A left-handed opening batsman, he made his first-class debut for Somerset in 1993 and quickly established himself as a regular member of the team. Trescothick made his One Day International (ODI) debut seven years later, against Zimbabwe in July 2000. His Test debut, against the West Indies, followed in August. Although former England captain Nasser Hussain likened Trescothick's build and batting temperament to that of Graham Gooch, his stroke play is more reminiscent of David Gower. (Full article...) Image 9 Harrison at the White House in December 1974 George Harrison MBE (25 February 1943 – 29 November 2001) was an English musician, singer-songwriter, and music and film producer who achieved international fame as the lead guitarist of the Beatles. Sometimes called "the quiet Beatle", Harrison embraced Indian culture and helped broaden the scope of popular music through his incorporation of Indian instrumentation and Hindu-aligned spirituality in the Beatles' work. Although the majority of the band's songs were written by John Lennon and Paul McCartney, most Beatles albums from 1965 onwards contained at least two Harrison compositions. His songs for the group include "Taxman", "Within You Without You", "While My Guitar Gently Weeps", "Here Comes the Sun" and "Something". Harrison's earliest musical influences included George Formby and Django Reinhardt; Carl Perkins, Chet Atkins and Chuck Berry were subsequent influences. By 1965, he had begun to lead the Beatles into folk rock through his interest in Bob Dylan and the Byrds, and towards Indian classical music through his use of the sitar on "Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)". Having initiated the band's embracing of Transcendental Meditation in 1967, he subsequently developed an association with the Hare Krishna movement. After the band's break-up in 1970, Harrison released the triple album All Things Must Pass, a critically acclaimed work that produced his most successful hit single, "My Sweet Lord", and introduced his signature sound as a solo artist, the slide guitar. He also organised the 1971 Concert for Bangladesh with Indian musician Ravi Shankar, a precursor to later benefit concerts such as Live Aid. In his role as a music and film producer, Harrison produced acts signed to the Beatles' Apple record label before founding Dark Horse Records in 1974 and co-founding HandMade Films in 1978. (Full article...) Image 10 Yao with the Houston Rockets in 2006 Yao Ming (Chinese: ??; born September 12, 1980) is a Chinese basketball executive and former professional player. He played for the Shanghai Sharks of the Chinese Basketball Association (CBA) and the Houston Rockets of the National Basketball Association (NBA). Yao was selected to start for the Western Conference in the NBA All-Star Game eight times, and was named to the All-NBA Team five times. During his final season, he was the tallest active player in the NBA, at 2.29 m (7 ft 6 in). Yao, who was born in Shanghai, started playing for the Sharks as a teenager, and played on their senior team for five years in the CBA, winning a championship in his final year. After negotiating with the CBA and the Sharks to secure his release, Yao was selected by the Rockets as the first overall pick in the 2002 NBA draft. He reached the NBA playoffs four times, and the Rockets won the first-round series in the 2009 postseason, their first playoff series victory since 1997. In July 2011, Yao announced his retirement from professional basketball because of a series of foot and ankle injuries which forced him to miss 250 games in his last six seasons. In eight seasons with the Rockets, Yao ranks sixth among franchise leaders in total points and total rebounds, and second in total blocks. (Full article...) Image 11 Mary Wollstonecraft by John Opie, c.?1797 Mary Wollstonecraft (UK: /?w?lst?nkr??ft/, /-kræft/; 27 April 1759 – 10 September 1797) was an English writer, philosopher, and advocate of women's rights. Until the late 20th century, Wollstonecraft's life, which encompassed several unconventional personal relationships at the time, received more attention than her writing. Today Wollstonecraft is regarded as one of the founding feminist philosophers, and feminists often cite both her life and her works as important influences. During her brief career, she wrote novels, treatises, a travel narrative, a history of the French Revolution, a conduct book, and a children's book. Wollstonecraft is best known for A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792), in which she argues that women are not naturally inferior to men, but appear to be only because they lack education. She suggests that both men and women should be treated as rational beings and imagines a social order founded on reason. (Full article...) Image 12 Douglas Albert Munro (October 11, 1919 – September 27, 1942) was a United States Coast Guardsman who was posthumously decorated with the Medal of Honor for an act of "extraordinary heroism" during World War II. He is the only person to have received the medal for actions performed during service in the Coast Guard. Munro was born in Canada to an American father and a British mother, and his family moved to the United States when he was a child. He was raised in South Cle Elum, Washington, and attended Central Washington College of Education before volunteering for military service shortly before the United States entered World War II. Munro and his shipmate Raymond Evans were known as the Gold Dust Twins, so-called because they were inseparable. (Full article...) Image 13 Mellitus (died 24 April 624) was the first bishop of London in the Saxon period, the third Archbishop of Canterbury, and a member of the Gregorian mission sent to England to convert the Anglo-Saxons from their native paganism to Christianity. He arrived in 601 AD with a group of clergy sent to augment the mission, and was consecrated as Bishop of London in 604. Mellitus was the recipient of a famous letter from Pope Gregory I known as the Epistola ad Mellitum, preserved in a later work by the medieval chronicler Bede, which suggested the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons be undertaken gradually, integrating pagan rituals and customs. In 610, Mellitus returned to Italy to attend a council of bishops, and returned to England bearing papal letters to some of the missionaries. Mellitus was exiled from London by the pagan successors to his patron, King Sæberht of Essex, following the latter's death around 616. King Æthelberht of Kent, Mellitus' other patron, died at about the same time, forcing him to take refuge in Gaul. Mellitus returned to England the following year, after Æthelberht's successor had been converted to Christianity, but he was unable to return to London, whose inhabitants remained pagan. Mellitus was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury in 619. During his tenure, he was alleged to have miraculously saved the cathedral, and much of the town of Canterbury, from a fire. After his death in 624, Mellitus was revered as a saint. (Full article...) Image 14 Dannatt in September 2007 General Francis Richard Dannatt, Baron Dannatt, GCB, CBE, MC, DL (born 23 December 1950) is a retired senior British Army officer and member of the House of Lords. He was Chief of the General Staff (head of the Army) from 2006 to 2009. Dannatt was commissioned into the Green Howards in 1971, and his first tour of duty was in Belfast as a platoon commander. During his second tour of duty, also in Northern Ireland, Dannatt was awarded the Military Cross. Following a major stroke in 1977, Dannatt considered leaving the Army, but was encouraged by his commanding officer (CO) to stay. After Staff College, he became a company commander and eventually took command of the Green Howards in 1989. He attended and then commanded the Higher Command and Staff Course, after which he was promoted to brigadier. Dannatt was given command of 4th Armoured Brigade in 1994 and commanded the British component of the Implementation Force (IFOR) the following year. (Full article...) Image 15 Scott in 1971 David Randolph Scott (born June 6, 1932) is an American retired test pilot and NASA astronaut who was the seventh person to walk on the Moon. The commander of Apollo 15, Scott was selected as an astronaut as part of the third group in 1963. Scott flew to space three times, and is one of four surviving Moon walkers and the last surviving crew member of Apollo 15. Before becoming an astronaut, Scott graduated from the United States Military Academy at West Point and joined the Air Force. After serving as a fighter pilot in Europe, he graduated from the Air Force Experimental Test Pilot School (Class 62C) and the Aerospace Research Pilot School (Class IV). Scott retired from the Air Force in 1975 with the rank of colonel, and more than 5,600 hours of logged flying time. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that at the age of 12, the Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse became the youngest ever Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo Calf Pipe and Bundle? ... that in developing the Dictionary of Women Worldwide, editors Anne Commire and Deborah Klezmer found other biographical dictionaries often devoted only five percent of their text to women? ... that President Theodore Roosevelt described the declining birthrate of the United States as a form of "race suicide", citing a term coined by eugenicist Edward Alsworth Ross? ... that General Sir Charles Reid shot the celebrated, but probably not man-eating, Leeds Tiger? ... that despite being nearly illiterate, Chinese soldier Gao Yubao wrote an autobiographical novel that has had more than six million copies in print? ... that Eleanor Roosevelt wrote four autobiographical memoirs: This Is My Story (1937), This I Remember (1949), On My Own (1958), and The Autobiography of Eleanor Roosevelt (1961)? ... that the termite Macrotermes michaelseni is considered to be an ecosystem engineer in the Okavango Delta in Botswana? ... that Governor Andrew Cuomo, who was initially praised for his handling of the COVID-19 pandemic in New York, is now implicated in a scandal related to it? ... that the 1979 Salvadoran coup d'état overthrew President Carlos Humberto Romero? ... that Thomas Fritsch, a film actor who charmed the teens of the 1960s, was the German voice of Russell Crowe, Scar and Diego, a Smilodon? ... that as executor to the estate of Sir Sidney Herbert, one of Sir George Sidney Herbert's tasks was to ensure a locked tin box was "destroyed unopened by cremating"? ... that experimental musician John Olson has been called a "sort of bizarro influencer" because of his habit of "chaotic shitposting"? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 2Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 3Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 4Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 5John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 6James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 7Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Image 8A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Ngozi Okonjo-IwealaPhoto: International Monetary Fund Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala (b. 1954) is the current Finance Minister of Nigeria. An economist who earned her degrees at Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the United States, she also served as a managing director of the World Bank, and Foreign Minister of Nigeria. She is credited with bringing increased transparency to her country's government, as well as helping Nigeria obtain its first ever sovereign credit rating. Image 2 Raden SalehPainting: Friedrich Carl Albert Schreuel Raden Saleh (1811–1880) was a Romantic painter of Arab-Javanese ethnicity from the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia). Born in Semarang, in 1829 he was sent to the Netherlands to study portraiture and landscape painting under artists such as Cornelis Kruseman and Andreas Schelfhout. Upon returning to Java in 1851, Saleh focused predominantly on the day-to-day lives of the Javanese, although he also completed his magnum opus, The Arrest of Pangeran Diponegoro, in this period. This painting, though long thought to be a self-portrait, is now attributed to Friedrich Carl Albert Schreuel, a German artist whom Saleh knew during his time in Europe. Image 3 Lies NoorPhotograph credit: Djakartawood Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Lies Noor (c.?1938 – 1961) was an Indonesian actress. She first appeared on film in Pulang (Homecoming) in 1952, while she was still at school. She rose in popularity with a string of successful films, and was able to command high fees for her roles. In the mid-1950s, having married and had a child, she took a break from her career to care full-time for her son. After returning to acting in 1960, however, she developed encephalitis the next year and died in hospital two days later. This photograph of Noor was taken around 1956. Image 4 Donald PleasencePhoto: Allan Warren; Restoration: Peter Weis Donald Pleasence (1919–1995) was a British film, television and stage actor best known for his roles in You Only Live Twice, where he played James Bond's arch-enemy Dr Blofeld, and The Great Escape, where he drew upon his experience in a German POW camp. He was nominated four times for the Tony Award for best performance by a leading actor in a Broadway play, and made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire for his services to the acting profession by Queen Elizabeth II in 1994. Image 5 Mary of TeckPhoto credit: Bain News Service Mary of Teck was the queen consort of King George V as well as the Empress of India. Before her accession, she was successively Duchess of York, Duchess of Cornwall and Princess of Wales. By birth, she was a princess of Teck, in the Kingdom of Württemberg, with the style Her Serene Highness. To her family, she was informally known as May, after her birth month. Queen Mary was known for setting the tone of the British Royal Family, as a model of regal formality and propriety, especially during state occasions. She was the first Queen Consort to attend the coronation of her successors. Noted for superbly bejewelling herself for formal events, Queen Mary left a collection of jewels now considered priceless. Image 6 Alexz JohnsonPhoto: Epitome Pictures Alexz Johnson (b. 1986) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and actress, best known for roles as Jude Harrison in the CTV series Instant Star (character shown here), Annie Thelan in the Disney Channel series So Weird, and as Erin Ulmer in the 2006 horror film Final Destination 3. Her album Voodoo was released in 2010. Image 7 Jeremy DoylePhoto: Sport the Library Jeremy Doyle (1983–2011) was an Australian wheelchair basketball player. Left paraplegic after a car accident, he was classified as a 1 point player. While representing his country Doyle won two gold medals, first at the 2009 Paralympic World Cup and again at the 2010 Wheelchair Basketball World Championship. Image 8 Billy StrayhornPhotograph credit: William P. Gottlieb; restored by Adam Cuerden Billy Strayhorn (November 29, 1915 – May 31, 1967) was an American jazz composer, pianist, lyricist, and arranger, best remembered for his long-time collaboration with bandleader and composer Duke Ellington that lasted nearly three decades. Though classical music was Strayhorn's first love, his ambition to become a classical composer went unrealized because of the harsh reality of a black man trying to make his way in the world of classical music, which at that time was almost completely white. He was introduced to the music of pianists like Art Tatum and Teddy Wilson at age 19, and the artistic influence of these musicians guided him into the realm of jazz, where he remained for the rest of his life. This photograph of Strayhorn was taken by William P. Gottlieb in the 1940s. Image 9 T206 Honus WagnerImage credit: American Tobacco Company The T206 Honus Wagner is a rare baseball card depicting Honus Wagner (February 24, 1874 – December 6, 1955), a dead-ball era shortstop considered one of the best players of all time. The card was designed and issued by the American Tobacco Company from 1909 to 1911. Only 50 to 200 cards were ever distributed to the public, and as a result of the card's rarity and popularity, prices have soared. In 2007, a collector paid $2.8 million for one, making it the most valuable baseball card in history. This specimen belongs to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in Cooperstown, New York. Image 10 Morgan PresselPhotograph: Keith Allison; Edit: Brandmeister American professional golfer Morgan Pressel, who first qualified for the Women's Open at age 12. Pressel had her first victory in the Kraft Nabisco Championship in 2007. She made her first professional hole-in-one, an eagle, at that year's Jamie Farr Owens Corning Classic. Image 11 Rory KennedyPhotograph credit: Lyndie Benson Rory Kennedy (born December 12, 1968) is an American documentary filmmaker and the youngest child of U.S. senator Robert Kennedy and Ethel Skakel. Born six months after the assassination of her father, her life has seen many tragedies. As a director and producer, she has made documentary films that center on social issues such as addiction, nuclear radiation, the treatment of prisoners of war, and the politics of the Mexican border fence. Her films have been featured on many TV networks, and her 2014 documentary Last Days in Vietnam was nominated for an Academy Award. Image 12 Queen Wilhelmina and Princess Juliana of the NetherlandsPhoto credit: Bain News Service Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands with her daughter and successor Princess Juliana, circa 1914. Wilhelmina was queen regnant from 1890 to 1948, longer than any other Dutch monarch. Outside the Netherlands she is primarily remembered for her role in the Second World War, in which she proved to be a great inspiration to the Dutch resistance, as well as a prominent leader of the Dutch government in exile. Juliana became queen regnant in 1948 after her mother's abdication and ruled until her own abdication in 1980, succeeded by her daughter, Beatrix. Image 13 Maxim GorkyPhoto: Herman Mishkin; Restoration: Fallschirmjäger Maxim Gorky (1868–1936) was a Russian political activist and writer who helped establish the Socialist Realism literary method. This portrait dates from a trip Gorky made to the United States in 1906, on which he raised funds for the Bolsheviks. During this trip he wrote his novel The Mother. Image 14 Ida B. WellsPhotograph: Mary Garrity; restoration: Adam Cuerden Ida B. Wells (1862–1931) was an African-American journalist, newspaper editor, suffragist, sociologist, and an early leader in the civil rights movement. Born into slavery in Holly Springs, Mississippi, Wells and her family were freed by the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863. Despite losing her parents to yellow fever when she was sixteen, Wells attended Fisk University and became a teacher. Politically active since her youth, she also became a writer on race issues and campaigned against lynching; in this latter capacity she published two influential pamphlets and traveled throughout the United States and the United Kingdom. Wells also helped establish the National Association of Colored Women and the National Afro-American Council. Image 15 Peter Oliver (painter)Portrait: Peter Oliver An 8.8-centimetre (3.5 in) tall self-portrait of the English miniaturist Peter Oliver (1594–1648). He often worked with watercolours. edit  On this day – November 18 Births 1787 – Louis-Jacques Daguerre, French inventor and photographer (d. 1851) 1901 – George Gallup, American statistician and opinion pollster (d. 1984) 1908 – Imogene Coca, American actress and comedienne (d. 2001) 1923 – Alan Shepard, American astronaut (d. 1998) (pictured) 1939 – Margaret Atwood, Canadian writer 1968 – Owen Wilson, American actor Deaths 1886 – Chester A. Arthur, 21st President of the United States (b. 1829) 1922 – Marcel Proust, French novelist (b. 1871) 1962 – Niels Bohr, Danish physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1885) 1965 – Henry A. Wallace, Vice President of the United States (b. 1888) 1969 – Joseph P. Kennedy Sr., American politician (b. 1888) 2002 – James Coburn, American actor (b. 1928) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 16 November 2021 – The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) 15 November 2021 – China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) 10 November 2021 – Politics of Sweden Swedish Prime Minister Stefan Löfven resigns after seven years in office, although he will continue to remain in office ad interim until a new government is formed. Minister for Finance Magdalena Andersson, who succeeded Löfven as leader of the Social Democratic Party on November 4, is expected to become the first female prime minister in the country's history. (ABC News) 29 October 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Myanmar coup d'état U Win Htein, aide to the deposed Burmese leader Aung San Suu Kyi, is sentenced to 20 years in prison for sedition. Htein became the first politician arrested in the aftermath of the February 2021 coup to be convicted. (Deutsche Welle) 28 October 2021 – The new leader of the Islamic State – West Africa Province has been killed during a military operation this month, two weeks after the death of the group's leader Abu Musab al-Barnawi was announced. (Reuters) 27 October 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic Labour Party leader Keir Starmer tests positive for COVID-19. (The Guardian) Updated: 21:33, 17 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "I have but one passion: to enlighten those who have been kept in the dark, in the name of humanity which has suffered so much and is entitled to happiness. My fiery protest is simply the cry of my very soul." — Émile Zola In "J'accuse…!", L'Aurore 13 January 1898 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Doug Ring with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Edgar James Kain, DFC (27 June 1918 – 7 June 1940) was a New Zealand fighter pilot and flying ace who flew in the Royal Air Force (RAF) during the Second World War. Born in Hastings, New Zealand, Kain developed an early interest in aviation and joined the RAF in 1936. He completed his flight training the following year and was posted to the RAF's No. 73 Squadron, flying the Gloster Gladiator and then the Hawker Hurricane. On the outbreak of the Second World War the squadron was dispatched to France. Kain began flying operational sorties during the Phoney War and gained his first aerial victory, a German bomber, in November 1939. He claimed his fifth aerial victory in March 1940, becoming the RAF's first flying ace of the Second World War as well as its first recipient of the Distinguished Flying Cross. His success early in the war and consequent media reports made him well known in Britain and the Dominions. (Full article...) Image 2 Cruttwell as portrayed in Isis, March 1924 alongside a satirical article by Evelyn Waugh Charles Robert Mowbray Fraser Cruttwell (23 May 1887 – 14 March 1941) was a British historian and academic who served as dean and later principal of Hertford College, Oxford. His field of expertise was modern European history, his most notable work being A History of the Great War, 1914–18. He is mainly remembered, however, for the vendetta pursued against him by the novelist Evelyn Waugh, in which Waugh showed his distaste for his former tutor by repeatedly using the name "Cruttwell" in his early novels and stories to depict a sequence of unsavoury or ridiculous characters. The prolonged minor humiliation thus inflicted may have contributed to Cruttwell's eventual mental breakdown. Cruttwell gained first-class honours at The Queen's College, Oxford, and was elected a Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, in 1911, and he became a lecturer in history at Hertford College the following year. His academic career was interrupted by war service, during which he suffered severe wounds; he returned to Oxford in 1919 and became dean of Hertford, and then principal of the college in 1930. It was during his tenure as dean that the feud with Evelyn Waugh developed while Waugh was a history scholar at Hertford in 1922–1924. Waugh pursued this hostility until shortly before Cruttwell's death. (Full article...) Image 3 Bolt in the cockpit of his F-86 Sabre in July 1953. John Franklin Bolt (19 May 1921 – 8 September 2004) was a naval aviator in the United States Marine Corps and a decorated flying ace who served during World War II and the Korean War. He remains the only U.S. Marine to achieve ace status in two wars and was also the only Marine jet fighter ace. He rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel during his military career. Born to a poor family in Laurens, South Carolina, Bolt was a self-described "workaholic" and was involved in numerous groups and social activities throughout his life. After dropping out of the University of Florida for financial reasons in 1941, he joined the US Navy and trained as a Marine Corps pilot. Sent to the Pacific Theater of Operations, he flew an F4U Corsair during the campaigns in the Marshall Islands and New Guinea, claiming six victories against Japanese A6M Zeros. (Full article...) Image 4 Official 1919 portrait of Iven Mackay by John Longstaff Lieutenant General Sir Iven Giffard Mackay, KBE, CMG, DSO & Bar, VD (7 April 1882 – 30 September 1966) was a senior Australian Army officer who served in both world wars. Mackay graduated from the University of Sydney in 1904 and taught physics there from 1910 until 1914, when he joined the Australian Imperial Force shortly after the outbreak of the First World War. He served with the 4th Infantry Battalion at Gallipoli, where he distinguished himself in hand-to-hand fighting at the Battle of Lone Pine. In April 1916, he assumed command of the 4th Infantry Battalion on the Western Front and led it at the Battle of Pozières, Battle of Bullecourt and Battle of Broodseinde. He was promoted to brigadier general in June 1918, and led the 1st Infantry Brigade at the Battle of Hazebrouck, the Battle of Amiens and in the attack on the Hindenburg Line. (Full article...) Image 5 Left wing, Martyrdom of the Apostles Stefan Lochner (the Dombild Master or Master Stefan; c. 1410 – late 1451) was a German painter working in the late International Gothic period. His paintings combine that era's tendency toward long flowing lines and brilliant colours with the realism, virtuoso surface textures and innovative iconography of the early Northern Renaissance. Based in Cologne, a commercial and artistic hub of northern Europe, Lochner was one of the most important German painters before Albrecht Dürer. Extant works include single-panel oil paintings, devotional polyptychs and illuminated manuscripts, which often feature fanciful and blue-winged angels. Today some thirty-seven individual panels are attributed to him with confidence. Less is known of his life. Art historians associating the Dombild Altarpiece master with the historical Stefan Lochner believe he was born in Meersburg in south-west Germany around 1410, and that he spent some of his apprenticeship in the Low Countries. Records further indicate that his career developed quickly but was cut short by an early death. We know that he was commissioned around 1442 by the Cologne council to provide decorations for the visit of Emperor Frederick III, a major occasion for the city. Records from the following years indicate growing wealth and the purchase of a number of properties around the city. Thereafter he seems to have over-extended his finances and fallen into debt. Plague hit Cologne in 1451 and there, apart from the records of creditors, mention of Stephan Lochner ends; it is presumed he died that year, aged around 40. (Full article...) Image 6 Barnes in 1948 Sid Barnes was a key member of Donald Bradman's famous Australian cricket team, which toured England in 1948. The team went undefeated in their 34 matches; this unprecedented feat by a Test side touring England earned them the sobriquet The Invincibles. A right-handed opening batsman, Barnes was part of Bradman's first-choice team and played in four of the five Tests—he missed one match due to injury—partnering the left-handed Arthur Morris. Barnes ended the first-class matches with 1,354 runs at a batting average of 56.41 including three centuries, placing him fifth in the aggregates and sixth in the averages among the Australians. Barnes found his best form in the Tests, yielding 329 runs at 82.25, ranking him third in the aggregates and second in the averages. He scored half-centuries in both innings of the First Test at Trent Bridge, before compiling a hard-hitting 141 in the second innings of the Second Test at Lord's, helping to set up victory in both matches. In the Third Test, Barnes was injured and hospitalised after being hit in the ribs by a Dick Pollard pull shot. He returned the next day and attempted to bat, but collapsed again and had to be taken back to hospital for an extended stay, missing two weeks of cricket. After missing the Fourth Test, Barnes returned to score his third half-century for the series as Australia completed a 4–0 win with an innings victory in the Fifth Test. (Full article...) Image 7 Nikita Khrushchev in East Berlin in June 1963 observing East German leader Walter Ulbricht's 70th birthday Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev (15 April [O.S. 3 April] 1894 – 11 September 1971) served as the First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union from 1953 to 1964 and as chairman of the country's Council of Ministers from 1958 to 1964. During his rule, Khrushchev stunned the communist world with his denunciation of Stalin's crimes, and embarked on a policy of de-Stalinization with his key ally Anastas Mikoyan. He sponsored the early Soviet space program, and enactment of relatively liberal reforms in domestic policy. After some false starts, and a narrowly avoided nuclear war over Cuba, he conducted successful negotiations with the United States to reduce Cold War tensions. His proclivity toward recklessness led the Kremlin leadership to strip him of power, replacing him with Leonid Brezhnev as First Secretary and Alexei Kosygin as Premier. Khrushchev was born in 1894 in a village in western Russia. He was employed as a metal worker during his youth, and he was a political commissar during the Russian Civil War. Under the sponsorship of Lazar Kaganovich, he worked his way up the Soviet hierarchy. He supported Joseph Stalin's purges and approved thousands of arrests. In 1938, Stalin sent him to govern the Ukrainian SSR, and he continued the purges there. During what was known in the Soviet Union as the Great Patriotic War, Khrushchev was again a commissar, serving as an intermediary between Stalin and his generals. Khrushchev was present at the bloody defense of Stalingrad, a fact he took great pride in throughout his life. After the war, he returned to Ukraine before being recalled to Moscow as one of Stalin's close advisers. (Full article...) Image 8 Sir Thomas Erpingham's effigy (possibly taken from his tomb) in the Erpingham Gate, Norwich Sir Thomas Erpingham KG (c.?1357 – 27 June 1428) was an English soldier and administrator who loyally served three generations of the House of Lancaster including English kings Henry IV and Henry V, and whose military career spanned four decades. After the Lancastrian usurpation of the English throne in 1399, his career in their service was transformed as he rose to national prominence, and through his access to royal patronage he acquired great wealth and influence. Erpingham was born in the English county of Norfolk, and knighted when a young man. During the reign of Richard II he served under the King's uncle John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, in Spain and Scotland, and was with Gaunt's son Henry Bolingbroke on crusades in Lithuania, Prussia and the Holy Land. Erpingham accompanied Bolingbroke into exile in October 1398, and was with him when he landed at Ravenspur in July 1399 to reclaim his inheritance as Duke of Lancaster, after his lands had been forfeited by Richard. Bolingbroke rewarded Erpingham by appointing him as constable of Dover Castle and warden of the Cinque Ports, and after ascending the throne as Henry IV he made him chamberlain of the royal household. Erpingham later helped to suppress the Epiphany Rising and was appointed guardian of Henry's second son Thomas. He was a member of the Privy Council, acting at one point as marshal of England. He attempted to have Henry le Despenser, the anti-Lancastrian bishop of Norwich, impeached as a rebel. (Full article...) Image 9 Ernest R. Emerson (born March 7, 1955) is an American custom knifemaker, martial artist, and edged-weapons expert. Originally an engineer and machinist in the aerospace industry, Emerson became a knifemaker by producing knives for a martial arts class and making art knives early in his knifemaking career. In the 1980s he became better known for his combat knives and popularizing a style of knife known as the Tactical-folder. In order to secure military contracts, Emerson eventually founded Emerson Knives, Inc a production company to mass-produce his designs in 1996. Emerson's knives have been displayed as museum pieces, designed for use by Navy SEALs and used by NASA in outer space. (Full article...) Image 10 Gate of the "family camp" at Auschwitz II–Birkenau On the night of 5 April 1944, Siegfried Lederer, a Czech Jew, escaped from the Auschwitz concentration camp wearing an SS uniform provided by SS-Rottenführer Viktor Pestek. Pestek opposed the Holocaust; he was a devout Catholic and was infatuated with Renée Neumann, a Jewish prisoner. He accompanied Lederer out of the camp, and the two men traveled together to the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia to obtain false documents for Neumann and her mother. Lederer, a former Czechoslovak Army officer and member of the Czech resistance, tried unsuccessfully to warn the Jews at Theresienstadt Ghetto about the mass murders at Auschwitz. He and Pestek returned to Auschwitz in an attempt to rescue Neumann and her mother. Pestek was arrested under disputed circumstances and later executed. Lederer returned to occupied Czechoslovakia, where he rejoined the resistance movement and attempted to smuggle a report on Auschwitz to the International Committee of the Red Cross in Switzerland. After the war he remained in Czechoslovakia. The story of the escape was retold by Lederer and writers including historian Erich Kulka. (Full article...) Image 11 Issy Smith (left) attending an Anzac Day parade on 25 April 1927. On the right is Stanley Gibbs, recipient of the Albert Medal. Issy Smith, VC (c.?18 September 1890 – 11 September 1940) was a British-Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross (VC), the highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to eligible forces of the Commonwealth and United Kingdom. In recognition of his VC, he was also awarded the French Croix de Guerre and Russian Cross of St. George (4th class) by the respective governments. Born Ishroulch Shmeilowitz (and other renderings), to parents residing in Egypt, Smith travelled to Britain as a child stowaway and first volunteered to serve in the British Army in 1904. He emigrated to Australia after discharge, where he remained until mobilised as a reservist in 1914. As a corporal in the 1st Battalion, The Manchester Regiment, Smith was engaged in the Second Battle of Ypres. On 26 April 1915, Smith, on his own initiative, recovered wounded soldiers while exposed to sustained fire and attended to them "with the greatest devotion to duty regardless of personal risk". His conduct secured a recommendation for the Victoria Cross, which was awarded to Smith in August 1915. (Full article...) Image 12 Roekiah, c. 1941 Roekiah (Perfected Spelling: Rukiah; 31 December 1917 – 2 September 1945), often credited as Miss Roekiah, was an Indonesian kroncong singer and film actress. The daughter of two stage performers, she began her career at the age of seven; by 1932 she had become well known in Batavia, Dutch East Indies (now Jakarta, Indonesia), as a singer and stage actress. Around this time she met Kartolo, whom she married in 1934. The two acted in the 1937 hit film Terang Boelan, in which Roekiah and Rd Mochtar played young lovers. After the film's commercial success, Roekiah, Kartolo, and most of the cast and crew of Terang Boelan were signed to Tan's Film, first appearing for the company in their 1938 production Fatima. They acted together in two more films before Mochtar left the company in 1940; through these films, Roekiah and Mochtar became the colony's first on-screen couple. Mochtar's replacement, Rd Djoemala, acted with Roekiah in four films, although these were less successful. After the Japanese invaded the Indies in 1942, Roekiah took only one more film role before her death; most of her time was used entertaining Japanese forces. (Full article...) Image 13 Adenhart pitching for the Salt Lake Bees in 2008 Nicholas James Adenhart (August 24, 1986 – April 9, 2009) was an American right-handed baseball starting pitcher who played parts of two seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim. In just four career games, Adenhart pitched 18 innings and posted a win-loss record of 1–0. A graduate of Williamsport High School, Adenhart was highly touted as a high school prospect until an injury in his final game required Tommy John surgery. He was drafted by the Angels in the 14th round of the 2004 Major League Baseball draft, and began playing in their minor league system after the surgery was a success. He spent three full seasons in the minor leagues before making his major league debut on May 1, 2008. After appearing in three games, Adenhart spent the rest of 2008 in the minor leagues developing his skills, and in 2009 he earned a spot in the Angels' starting rotation. (Full article...) Image 14 Nancy Freeman-Mitford CBE (28 November 1904 – 30 June 1973), known as Nancy Mitford, was an English novelist, biographer, and journalist. The eldest of the Mitford sisters, she was regarded as one of the "bright young things" on the London social scene in the inter-war period. She wrote several novels about upper-class life in England and France, and is considered a sharp and often provocative wit. She also has a reputation as a writer of popular historical biographies. Mitford enjoyed a privileged childhood as the eldest daughter of the Hon. David Freeman-Mitford, later 2nd Baron Redesdale. Educated privately, she had no training as a writer before publishing her first novel in 1931. This early effort and the three that followed it created little stir. Her two semi-autobiographical post-war novels, The Pursuit of Love (1945) and Love in a Cold Climate (1949), established her reputation. (Full article...) Image 15 Ruth Elizabeth "Bazy" Tankersley (March 7, 1921 – February 5, 2013) was an American breeder of Arabian horses and a newspaper publisher. She was a daughter of U.S. Senator Joseph Medill McCormick. Her mother was progressive Republican U.S. Representative Ruth Hanna McCormick, making Tankersley a granddaughter of the Senator Mark Hanna of Ohio. Although Tankersley was involved with conservative Republican causes as a young woman, including a friendship with Senator Joseph McCarthy, her progressive roots reemerged in later years; by the 21st century, she had become a strong supporter of environmental causes and backed Barack Obama for president in 2008. Tankersley's father died when she was a child. When her mother remarried, the family moved to the southwestern United States where Tankersley spent considerable time riding horses. She became particularly enamored of the Arabian breed after she was given a part-Arabian to ride. At 18 she began working as a reporter for a newspaper published by her mother. She later ran a newspaper in Illinois with her first husband, Peter Miller, and then in 1949 she became the publisher of the conservative Washington Times-Herald. That paper was owned by her uncle, the childless Robert McCormick, who viewed Tankersley as his heir until the two had a falling out over editorial control of the newspaper and her relationship with Garvin Tankersley, who became her second husband. After The Washington Post absorbed the Times-Herald, she shifted to full-time horse breeding. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Charles W. Lyons was the only Jesuit and likely the only educator in the United States to have been president of four different colleges? ... that electronics engineer Chen Xingbi was inducted into the ISPSD Hall of Fame for his invention of superjunction power semiconductor devices? ... that the Stinnes–Legien Agreement was named after a trade union leader and an industrialist? ... that a business-firm party is a political party created and run by one person to further their own interests? ... that despite suffering from vertigo, actor Bob Barrett performed his own stunt on the hospital rooftop in the Holby City episode "Man Down"? ... that to maintain personal privacy, manga artist Paru Itagaki wears a large chicken mask that obscures her face for all public appearances? ... that in 1939, Lawrence Milner testified against Australian-born longshoremen union leader Harry Bridges in what Time magazine called "the most important deportation hearings of the decade"? ... that the decision not to include a duck with the statue of Sir Nigel Gresley led to "possibly the most acrimonious argument in the long, pedantic history of the railway hobbyist"? ... that computer scientist Odest Chadwicke Jenkins taught a robot to do the Cabbage Patch by demonstrating the dance? ... that Brian O'Neill said in his tribute to Leslie Daiken: "He was always busy, always with a half dozen irons in the fire, always trying to give a hand to some Irish writer who needed it"? ... that according to a 2005 biography, Max Born, the author of the classic textbook Principles of Optics, felt dejected when he did not share in the 1932 Nobel Prize that was given to his assistant Werner Heisenberg? ... that professional athletes protested by refusing to play in response to high-profile police shootings of Black people in 2020? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 2Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 3John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 4Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Image 5Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 6Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 7Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 8James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 John Henry NewmanPainting: John Everett Millais John Henry Newman (1801–90) was a British cleric and leader in the Oxford Movement, a group of Anglicans who wished to return the Church of England to many Catholic beliefs and forms of worship traditional in the medieval times. In 1845 Newman converted to Catholicism, eventually rising to cardinal. Image 2 Buster KeatonPhoto credit: Bain News Service Along with Charlie Chaplin and Harold Lloyd, Buster Keaton was one of the most important comic actors of the silent era. His trademark was physical comedy with a stoic, deadpan expression on his face, earning him the nickname "The Great Stone Face". He appeared in dozens of films, and his The General was voted the fifteenth-best film of all time by Sight & Sound readers. Entertainment Weekly also named him the seventh-greatest film director in history. Image 3 Javier SolanaPhoto credit: ? Dr. Javier Solana, the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the Secretary-General of both the Council of the European Union (EU) and the Western European Union (WEU). This photograph shows him as he is discussing with students of RWTH Aachen University, one day before receiving the International Charlemagne Prize of the city of Aachen. Image 4 Zishe BreitbartPhoto: National Photo Co. Restoration: Michel Vuijlsteke Siegmund "Zishe" Breitbart (1893–1925), shown here pulling a heavy weight using only his teeth, was a Polish strongman and circus performer who was known as the "Strongest Man in the World" during the 1920s. He was widely popular in both Europe and the U.S., but died at the age of 32 after an accident during a performance. Image 5 K. T. ThomasPhotograph credit: Augustus Binu K. T. Thomas (born 30 January 1937) is a former judge of the Supreme Court of India, known for his strong opinions on Indian socio-political matters. He was selected as a district and sessions judge in 1977, and became a judge of the Kerala High Court in 1985. A decade later, he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court, on which he served until retiring in 2002. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Indian government in 2007 for services in the field of social affairs. Image 6 Muammar GaddafiPhotograph: Jesse B. Awalt/US Navy Muammar Gaddafi (c. 1942 – 2011) was a Libyan revolutionary and politician. Taking power in a coup d'etat, he ruled as Revolutionary Chairman of the Libyan Arab Republic from 1969 to 1977 and then as the "Brotherly Leader" of the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya from 1977 to 2011, when he was ousted in the Libyan Civil War. Initially developing his own variant of Arab nationalism and Arab socialism known as the Third International Theory, he later embraced Pan-Africanism and served as Chairperson of the African Union from 2009 to 2010. Image 7 Robert William ThomsonImage credit: Illustrated London News The obituary of Robert William Thomson as it appeared in the Illustrated London News on 29 March 1873. Thomson was the inventor of the pneumatic tyre, the elliptic rotary steam engine and locomotive traction engine, the portable steam crane, and numerous other inventions. The obituary preceding his is for Evelyn Denison, 1st Viscount Ossington. Image 8 Jean-Baptiste CarpeauxImage credit: The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux was a 19th-century French sculptor and painter who sought to inject movement and spontaneity into his works. This engraving, done to commemorate him after his death, shows his sculpture Flore below him, and others of his works above. In his time, some of his works, particularly La Danse, were criticised as indecent, but today his sculptures are exhibited in major museums of art worldwide. Image 9 Jigme Khesar Namgyel WangchuckPhoto credit: Royal family of Bhutan Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck is the fifth and current Bhutan Dragon King and head of the Wangchuck dynasty. He became king on 14 December 2006, and was officially crowned on 6 November 2008. The young king began his unusual reign overseeing the democratization of Bhutan, stating that the responsibility for this generation of Bhutanese was to ensure the success of democracy. Image 10 Fridtjof NansenPhoto: Henry Van der Weyde; Restoration: Smalljim/PLW Fridtjof Nansen (1861–1930) was a Norwegian explorer, scientist, diplomat, humanitarian and Nobel Peace Prize laureate. He led the team that made the first crossing of the Greenland interior in 1888, and won international fame after reaching a record northern latitude of 86°14? during his North Pole expedition of 1893–96. Although he retired from exploration after his return to Norway, his techniques of polar travel and his innovations in equipment and clothing influenced a generation of subsequent Arctic and Antarctic expeditions. In 1922 he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his work on behalf of the displaced victims of the First World War and related conflicts. Image 11 Enoch PowellPhotograph: Allan Warren Enoch Powell (1912–98), a professor of Ancient Greek by age 25 and brigadier during World War II, took up politics in the late 1940s and in the 1960s was selected for several cabinet positions. In 1968, he gave the "Rivers of Blood" speech about the dangers of immigration to the United Kingdom and of proposed anti-discrimination legislation. Image 12 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. Image 13 Célestine Galli-MariéPhotograph credit: Nadar; restored by Adam Cuerden Célestine Galli-Marié (1837–1905) was a French mezzo-soprano who is most famous for creating the title role in the opera Carmen by Georges Bizet. It was said that, during the opera's 33rd performance on 2 June 1875, Galli-Marié had a premonition of Bizet's death while singing in the third act, and fainted when she left the stage; the composer in fact died that night and the next performance was cancelled due to her indisposition. This photograph by Nadar depicts Galli-Marié as the titular character in Carmen. Image 14 Francisco GoyaPainting: Vicente López y Portaña Francisco Goya (1746–1828) was a Spanish romantic painter and printmaker regarded as both the last of the Old Masters and the first of the moderns. Goya was a court painter to the Spanish Crown, and through his works was both a commentator on and chronicler of his era. This portrait was completed when Goya was 80 years old. Image 15 Ada LovelacePainting: Alfred Edward Chalon Ada Lovelace (1815–1852) was an English mathematician and writer, chiefly known for her work on using Charles Babbage's planned mechanical general-purpose computer, the Analytical Engine. Her notes include what is recognised as the first algorithm intended to be carried out by a machine, and as such she is often regarded as the first computer programmer. edit  On this day – November 18 Births 1787 – Louis-Jacques Daguerre, French inventor and photographer (d. 1851) 1901 – George Gallup, American statistician and opinion pollster (d. 1984) 1908 – Imogene Coca, American actress and comedienne (d. 2001) 1923 – Alan Shepard, American astronaut (d. 1998) (pictured) 1939 – Margaret Atwood, Canadian writer 1968 – Owen Wilson, American actor Deaths 1886 – Chester A. Arthur, 21st President of the United States (b. 1829) 1922 – Marcel Proust, French novelist (b. 1871) 1962 – Niels Bohr, Danish physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1885) 1965 – Henry A. Wallace, Vice President of the United States (b. 1888) 1969 – Joseph P. Kennedy Sr., American politician (b. 1888) 2002 – James Coburn, American actor (b. 1928) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 16 November 2021 – The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) 15 November 2021 – China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) 10 November 2021 – Politics of Sweden Swedish Prime Minister Stefan Löfven resigns after seven years in office, although he will continue to remain in office ad interim until a new government is formed. Minister for Finance Magdalena Andersson, who succeeded Löfven as leader of the Social Democratic Party on November 4, is expected to become the first female prime minister in the country's history. (ABC News) 29 October 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Myanmar coup d'état U Win Htein, aide to the deposed Burmese leader Aung San Suu Kyi, is sentenced to 20 years in prison for sedition. Htein became the first politician arrested in the aftermath of the February 2021 coup to be convicted. (Deutsche Welle) 28 October 2021 – The new leader of the Islamic State – West Africa Province has been killed during a military operation this month, two weeks after the death of the group's leader Abu Musab al-Barnawi was announced. (Reuters) Updated: 21:33, 18 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "I have but one passion: to enlighten those who have been kept in the dark, in the name of humanity which has suffered so much and is entitled to happiness. My fiery protest is simply the cry of my very soul." — Émile Zola In "J'accuse…!", L'Aurore 13 January 1898 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Doug Ring with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Autobiography A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Buckner c.?1860–70 Simon Bolivar Buckner (/?sa?m?n ?b?l?v?r ?b?kn?r/ SY-m?n BOL-i-v?r BUK-n?r; April 1, 1823 – January 8, 1914) was an American soldier, Confederate combatant, and politician. He fought in the United States Army in the Mexican–American War. He later fought in the Confederate States Army during the American Civil War. After the war, he served as the 30th governor of Kentucky. After graduating from the United States Military Academy at West Point, Buckner became an instructor there. He took a hiatus from teaching to serve in the Mexican–American War, participating in many of the major battles of that conflict. He resigned from the army in 1855 to manage his father-in-law's real estate in Chicago, Illinois. He returned to his native state of Kentucky in 1857 and was appointed adjutant general by Governor Beriah Magoffin in 1861. In this position, he tried to enforce Kentucky's neutrality policy in the early days of the Civil War. When the state's neutrality was breached, Buckner accepted a commission in the Confederate Army after declining a similar commission to the Union Army. In 1862, he accepted Ulysses S. Grant's demand for an "unconditional surrender" at the Battle of Fort Donelson. He was the first Confederate general to surrender an army in the war. He spent five months as a prisoner of war. After his release, Buckner participated in Braxton Bragg's failed invasion of Kentucky and near the end of the war became chief of staff to Edmund Kirby Smith in the Trans-Mississippi Department. (Full article...) Image 2 Peter Badcock c. 1954 Peter John Badcoe, VC (11 January 1934 – 7 April 1967) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest award for gallantry in battle that could be awarded at that time to a member of the Australian armed forces. Badcoe, born Peter Badcock, joined the Australian Army in 1950 and graduated from the Officer Cadet School, Portsea, in 1952 as a second lieutenant in the Royal Australian Artillery. A series of regimental postings followed, including a tour in the Federation of Malaya in 1962, during which he spent a week in South Vietnam observing the fighting. During the previous year, Badcock had changed his surname to Badcoe. After another regimental posting, he transferred to the Royal Australian Infantry Corps, and was promoted to major. In August 1966, Badcoe arrived in South Vietnam as a member of the Australian Army Training Team Vietnam. He was initially a sub-sector adviser, but in December became the operations adviser for Th?a Thiên-Hu? Province. In this role, between February and April 1967, he displayed conspicuous gallantry and leadership on three occasions while on operations with South Vietnamese Regional Force units. In the final battle, he was killed by a burst of machine-gun fire. He was highly respected by both his South Vietnamese and United States allies, and was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross for his actions. He was also awarded the United States Silver Star and several South Vietnamese medals. He was buried at Terendak Garrison Cemetery in Malaysia. (Full article...) Image 3 Brooks in October 2011 Phillip Jack Brooks (born October 26, 1978), better known by the ring name CM Punk, is an American professional wrestler, actor, professional mixed martial arts commentator and retired mixed martial artist, currently signed to All Elite Wrestling (AEW). He is best known for his time in WWE, where his 434-day reign as WWE Champion stands as the sixth-longest in title history. He is also signed to Cage Fury Fighting Championships (CFFC) as a commentator. Brooks began his professional wrestling career in 1999 on the independent circuit, mainly with Ring of Honor (ROH), winning the ROH World Championship once. He signed with World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) in 2005, and won the WWE Championship twice, the World Heavyweight Championship three times, and the Intercontinental Championship and the ECW World Heavyweight Championship once each. Brooks also won the World Tag Team Championship, becoming WWE's 19th Triple Crown Champion; the fastest wrestler to achieve this feat, in 203 days. He is also the only back-to-back Money in the Bank winner, has headlined several WWE pay-per-view events, won Superstar of the Year at the 2011 Slammy Awards, and was voted Wrestler of the Year in 2011 and 2012 by readers of Pro Wrestling Illustrated. After becoming disillusioned with WWE, Brooks acrimoniously departed the company and retired from professional wrestling in 2014. After much speculation, he eventually returned and joined AEW in 2021. (Full article...) Image 4 Wing Commander Brill, July 1944 William Lloyd Brill, DSO, DFC & Bar (17 May 1916 – 12 October 1964) was a senior officer and bomber pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). Born in the Riverina district of New South Wales, he was a farmer and a member of the Militia before joining the RAAF in 1940. After training in Australia and Canada, he was posted to Britain in 1941 to take part in the air war over Europe. Brill first saw combat with No. 460 Squadron RAAF, flying Vickers Wellington medium bombers. He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC) in May 1942 for attacking a target after his plane was badly damaged by anti-aircraft fire. Following assignment as an instructor with the Royal Air Force (RAF), he returned to the bombing campaign in January 1944 as a flight commander with No. 463 Squadron RAAF, flying Avro Lancaster heavy bombers. Brill's leadership and determination to complete his missions despite damage to his aircraft—on one occasion inflicted by another Lancaster's bombs from above—earned him the Distinguished Service Order. Promoted to wing commander in May 1944, he took over No. 467 Squadron RAAF after the death in combat of its then-commander, Group Captain John Balmer. Brill was awarded a bar to his DFC in July, for his skill in evading three German night fighters. Returning to Australia, he remained in the Air Force after the war and led No. 10 Squadron in 1949–50. He went on to command air bases at Rathmines, Canberra and Townsville during the 1950s and 1960s. Brill served two terms as RAAF Director of Personnel Services, in 1956–59 and 1960–63, by which time he had been promoted to group captain. His final posting was at the Department of Air in Canberra. He died of a heart attack in October 1964. (Full article...) Image 5 Toshack in about 1947 Ernie Toshack was a member of Donald Bradman's famous Australian cricket team, which toured England in 1948 and was undefeated in their 34 matches. This unprecedented feat by a Test side touring England earned Bradman's men the sobriquet The Invincibles. A left-arm medium-pace seam bowler, Toshack was a member of the first-choice team, and played in the first four Test matches before succumbing to a persistent knee injury. Toshack contained the English batsmen with leg theory in between the new ball bursts of Keith Miller and Ray Lindwall. He took 11 wickets in the Tests; his most notable performance was the 5/40 he took in the second innings of the Second Test at Lord's. However, his knee failed in the first innings of the Fourth Test when he took 1/112. He was unable to bowl in the second innings and missed the Fifth Test, marking the end of his Test career. (Full article...) Image 6 Jackson performing in June 1988 Michael Joseph Jackson (August 29, 1958 – June 25, 2009) was an American singer, songwriter and dancer. Dubbed the "King of Pop", he is regarded as one of the most significant cultural figures of the 20th century. Over a four-decade career, his contributions to music, dance and fashion, along with his publicized personal life, made him a global figure in popular culture. Jackson influenced artists across many music genres; through stage and video performances, he popularized complicated dance moves such as the moonwalk, to which he gave the name, as well as the robot. He is the most awarded music artist in history. The eighth child of the Jackson family, Jackson made his professional debut in 1964 with his elder brothers Jackie, Tito, Jermaine and Marlon as a member of the Jackson 5 (later known as the Jacksons). Jackson began his solo career in 1971 while at Motown Records. He became a solo star with his 1979 album Off the Wall. His music videos, including those for "Beat It", "Billie Jean" and "Thriller" from his 1982 album Thriller, are credited with breaking racial barriers and transforming the medium into an artform and promotional tool. He helped propel the success of MTV and continued to innovate with videos for the albums Bad (1987), Dangerous (1991) and HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I (1995). Thriller became the best-selling album of all time, while Bad was the first album to produce five U.S. Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles. (Full article...) Image 7 Olga Alexandrovna circa 1910 Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia (Russian: ?????? ??????????????; 13 June [O.S. 1 June] 1882 – 24 November 1960) was the youngest child of Emperor Alexander III of Russia and younger sister of Emperor Nicholas II. She was raised at the Gatchina Palace outside Saint Petersburg. Olga's relationship with her mother, Empress Marie, the daughter of King Christian IX of Denmark, was strained and distant from childhood. In contrast, she and her father were close. He died when she was 12, and her brother Nicholas became emperor. (Full article...) Image 8 Innis in the 1920s Harold Adams Innis FRSC (November 5, 1894 – November 9, 1952) was a Canadian professor of political economy at the University of Toronto and the author of seminal works on media, communication theory, and Canadian economic history. He helped develop the staples thesis, which holds that Canada's culture, political history, and economy have been decisively influenced by the exploitation and export of a series of "staples" such as fur, fish, lumber, wheat, mined metals, and coal. The staple thesis dominated economic history in Canada from the 1930s to 1960s, and continues to be a fundamental part of the Canadian political economic tradition. Innis's writings on communication explore the role of media in shaping the culture and development of civilizations. He argued, for example, that a balance between oral and written forms of communication contributed to the flourishing of Greek civilization in the 5th century BC. He warned, however, that Western civilization is now imperiled by powerful, advertising-driven media obsessed by "present-mindedness" and the "continuous, systematic, ruthless destruction of elements of permanence essential to cultural activity." His intellectual bond with Eric A. Havelock formed the foundations of the Toronto School of communication theory, which provided a source of inspiration for future members of the school: Marshall McLuhan and Edmund Snow Carpenter. (Full article...) Image 9 Anna Anderson (16 December 1896 – 12 February 1984) was an impostor who claimed to be Grand Duchess Anastasia of Russia. Anastasia, the youngest daughter of the last Tsar and Tsarina of Russia, Nicholas II and Alexandra, was murdered along with her parents and siblings on 17 July 1918 by communist revolutionaries in Yekaterinburg, Russia, but the location of her body was unknown until 2007. In 1920, Anderson was institutionalized in a mental hospital after a suicide attempt in Berlin. At first, she went by the name Fräulein Unbekannt (German for Miss Unknown) as she refused to reveal her identity. Later, she used the name Tschaikovsky and then Anderson. In March 1922, claims that Anderson was a Russian grand duchess first received public attention. Most members of Grand Duchess Anastasia's family and those who had known her, including court tutor Pierre Gilliard, said Anderson was an impostor but others were convinced she was Anastasia. In 1927, a private investigation funded by the Tsarina's brother, Ernest Louis, Grand Duke of Hesse, identified Anderson as Franziska Schanzkowska, a Polish factory worker with a history of mental illness. After a lawsuit lasting many years, the German courts ruled that Anderson had failed to prove she was Anastasia, but through media coverage, her claim gained notoriety. (Full article...) Image 10 Vance Drummond at Kimpo, South Korea, 1951 Vance Drummond, DFC, AFC (22 February 1927 – 17 May 1967) was a New Zealand–born Australian pilot who fought in the Korean and Vietnam Wars. He initially saw service in the New Zealand military, but joined the Royal Australian Air Force in 1949 and graduated as a sergeant pilot in 1951. Posted to No. 77 Squadron in Korea, he flew Gloster Meteor jet fighters and earned the US Air Medal for his combat skills. He was shot down by a Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15 in December 1951 and imprisoned for almost two years. After returning to Australia he converted to CAC Sabre jets and in December 1961 became a flight commander with No. 75 Squadron; he subsequently led the squadron's Black Diamonds aerobatic team, and was awarded the Air Force Cross in 1965. Drummond was promoted to acting wing commander in December 1965 and posted to South Vietnam on staff duties with the United States Air Force. He joined the US Air Force's 19th Tactical Air Support Squadron, operating Cessna Bird Dog aircraft, as a forward air controller in July 1966. That month he earned the Distinguished Flying Cross for his part in rescuing a company of soldiers surrounded by Viet Cong forces. In October he was awarded the South Vietnamese Cross of Gallantry with Silver Star. Drummond took command of No. 3 Squadron, flying Dassault Mirage IIIO supersonic fighters out of Williamtown, New South Wales, in February 1967. His Mirage crashed into the sea during a training exercise on 17 May; neither Drummond nor the plane was found. (Full article...) Image 11 Photograph by W. & D. Downey, c.?1889 Alexandra of Denmark (Alexandra Caroline Marie Charlotte Louise Julia; 1 December 1844 – 20 November 1925) was Queen of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions and Empress of India from 22 January 1901 to 6 May 1910 as the wife of King-Emperor Edward VII. Alexandra's family had been relatively obscure until 1852, when her father, Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg, was chosen with the consent of the major European powers to succeed his second cousin Frederick VII as king of Denmark. At the age of sixteen Alexandra was chosen as the future wife of Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, the heir apparent of Queen Victoria. The couple married eighteen months later in 1863, the year in which her father became king of Denmark as Christian IX and her brother was appointed king of Greece as George I. She was Princess of Wales from 1863 to 1901, the longest anyone has ever held that title, and became generally popular; her style of dress and bearing were copied by fashion-conscious women. Largely excluded from wielding any political power, she unsuccessfully attempted to sway the opinion of British ministers and her husband's family to favour Greek and Danish interests. Her public duties were restricted to uncontroversial involvement in charitable work. (Full article...) Image 12 Self-portrait photograph Bronwyn Bancroft (born 1958) is an Australian artist, and amongst the first Australian fashion designers invited to show her work in Paris. Born in Tenterfield, New South Wales, and trained in Canberra and Sydney, Bancroft worked as a fashion designer, and is an artist, illustrator, and arts administrator. In 1985, Bancroft established a shop called Designer Aboriginals, selling fabrics made by Aboriginal artists including herself. She was a founding member of Boomalli Aboriginal Artists Co-operative. Art work by Bancroft is held by the National Gallery of Australia, the Art Gallery of New South Wales and the Art Gallery of Western Australia. She has provided art work for more than 20 children's books, including Stradbroke Dreamtime by writer and activist Oodgeroo Noonuccal, and books by artist and writer Sally Morgan. She has received design commissions, including one for the exterior of a sports centre in Sydney. (Full article...) Image 13 The Accord of Winchester, 1072. Thomas' signature is on the right, next to Lanfranc's. Thomas of Bayeux (died 18 November 1100) was Archbishop of York from 1070 until 1100. He was educated at Liège and became a royal chaplain to Duke William of Normandy, who later became King William I of England. After the Norman Conquest, the king nominated Thomas to succeed Ealdred as Archbishop of York. After Thomas' election, Lanfranc, Archbishop of Canterbury, demanded an oath from Thomas to obey him and any future Archbishops of Canterbury; this was part of Lanfranc's claim that Canterbury was the primary bishopric, and its holder the head of the English Church. Thomas countered that York had never made such an oath. As a result, Lanfranc refused to consecrate him. The King eventually persuaded Thomas to submit, but Thomas and Lanfranc continued to clash over ecclesiastical issues, including the primacy of Canterbury, which dioceses belonged to the province of York, and the question of how York's obedience to Canterbury would be expressed. After King William I's death Thomas served his successor, William II, and helped to put down a rebellion led by Thomas' old mentor Odo of Bayeux. Thomas also attended the trial for rebellion of the Bishop of Durham, William de St-Calais, Thomas' sole suffragan, or bishop subordinate to York. During William II's reign Thomas once more became involved in the dispute with Canterbury over the primacy when he refused to consecrate the new Archbishop of Canterbury, Anselm, if Anselm was named the Primate of England in the consecration service. After William II's sudden death in 1100, Thomas arrived too late to crown King Henry I, and died soon after the coronation. (Full article...) Image 14 Kentikian in 2018 Susianna "Susi" Levonovna Kentikian (Russian: ??????? (????) ????????? ????????, Armenian: ?????? ?????????; born Syuzanna Kentikyan on 11 September 1987) is an Armenian-German former professional boxer who competed from 2005 to 2016. She was born in Yerevan, Armenian SSR, but left the country with her family at the age of five because of the First Nagorno-Karabakh War. Kentikian has lived in Hamburg since 1996 and began boxing at the age of twelve. Following a successful amateur career, she turned professional in 2005 upon signing with the Hamburg-based Spotlight Boxing promotion. Kentikian is a two-time flyweight world champion, having held the World Boxing Association (WBA) female title from 2007 to 2012, and from 2013 to 2017. Additionally, she was the World Boxing Organization (WBO) flyweight champion from 2009 to 2012, and held the Women's International Boxing Federation (WIBF) title from 2007 to 2012 and 2015 to 2017. During the 2009 WBA convention in Colombia she was named the first ever WBA female Super Champion. It was announced that this belt would be called "Susi Kentikian belt" for all other future Super Champions. (Full article...) Image 15 Davies in 2008 Stephen Russell Davies OBE (born 27 April 1963), better known as Russell T Davies, is a Welsh screenwriter and television producer whose works include Queer as Folk, The Second Coming, Casanova, the 2005 revival of the BBC One science fiction franchise Doctor Who, Cucumber, Years and Years and It's a Sin. Born in Swansea, Davies had aspirations as a comic artist before focusing on being a playwright and screenwriter. After graduating from Oxford University, he joined the BBC's children's department, CBBC, in 1985 on a part-time basis and held various positions, which included creating two series, Dark Season and Century Falls. He eventually left the BBC for Granada Television, and in 1994 began writing adult television drama. His early scripts generally explored concepts of religion and sexuality among various backdrops: Revelations was a soap opera about organised religion and featured a lesbian vicar; Springhill was a soap drama about a Catholic family in contemporary Liverpool; The Grand explored society's opinion of subjects such as prostitution, abortion and homosexuality during the interwar period; and Queer as Folk recreated his experiences in the Manchester gay scene. His work in the 2000s included Bob & Rose, which portrayed a gay man who fell in love with a woman; The Second Coming, which focused on the second coming and deicide of Jesus Christ from a mostly non-religious point of view; Mine All Mine, a comedy about a family who discover they own the entire city of Swansea; and Casanova, an adaptation of the complete memoirs of Venetian adventurer Giacomo Casanova. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that experimental musician John Olson has been called a "sort of bizarro influencer" because of his habit of "chaotic shitposting"? ... that the New South Wales Governor's Body Guard of Light Horse seemed to have been absent when Governor William Bligh was arrested during the Rum Rebellion? ... that Edward Hewitt Nichols, the first leader of Hong Kong's Country Parks administrations, oversaw the designation of 40 per cent of the territory as parkland? ... that British educator Thomas Lucas created an embossed shorthand to teach the blind to read by touch around 1830–1832, before the introduction of braille in the UK? ... that on the day she began filming her first starring role in Ginger, nine-year-old Jane Withers received congratulatory bouquets from W. C. Fields and President Franklin D. Roosevelt? ... that Eugene C. Barker was involved in the "biggest bear fight" in Texas history with Governor James E. Ferguson, but Barker kept his job and Ferguson was later impeached? ... that scientist KC Claffy was inducted into the Internet Hall of Fame for her work on measuring the Internet? ... that Izkia Siches, who was re-elected as president of the Chilean Medical College in 2020, has ruled out running for President of Chile in 2021? ... that the termite Macrotermes michaelseni is considered to be an ecosystem engineer in the Okavango Delta in Botswana? ... that the biography of Karin Boye, written by Swedish literary critic Margit Abenius, was criticised for the conservative analysis of Boye's homosexuality? ... that African American Ivory Winston sang for President Harry S. Truman's birthday and was "Iowa's First Lady of Song"? ... that the writer of the hymn "Angel Voices, Ever Singing" banned it from being published with a tune composed by Arthur Sullivan? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 2Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 3Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 4Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Image 5James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 6John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 7Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 8Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Morgan PresselPhotograph: Keith Allison; Edit: Brandmeister American professional golfer Morgan Pressel, who first qualified for the Women's Open at age 12. Pressel had her first victory in the Kraft Nabisco Championship in 2007. She made her first professional hole-in-one, an eagle, at that year's Jamie Farr Owens Corning Classic. More selected portraits Image 2 Brian NankervisPhoto: John O'Neill; edit: JJ Harrison Brian Nankervis (b. 1956), an Australian comedian and writer, shown here during a live performance. Nankervis rose to popularity while playing Raymond J. Bartholomeuz on Hey Hey It's Saturday; since 2005 he has been a host of the gameshow RocKwiz. More selected portraits Image 3 Alice ManfieldPhoto: Unknown; Restoration: John O'Neill Alice Manfield (1878–1960), commonly known as Guide Alice, was a mountain guide, amateur naturalist, chalet owner, photographer, and early feminist figure from Victoria, Australia. Her pioneering work at Mount Buffalo from the 1890s to the 1930s led to her becoming a tourist attraction in her own right, and helped lead to the establishment of the Mount Buffalo National Park. Manfield's parents ran a hotel at Mount Buffalo, and she led tours up the mountain from her youth. Because of her enthusiasm and extensive knowledge of the area, she quickly became a highly sought-after guide. She continued guiding tourists until the 1930s. More selected portraits Image 4 John Henry NewmanPainting: John Everett Millais John Henry Newman (1801–90) was a British cleric and leader in the Oxford Movement, a group of Anglicans who wished to return the Church of England to many Catholic beliefs and forms of worship traditional in the medieval times. In 1845 Newman converted to Catholicism, eventually rising to cardinal. More selected portraits Image 5 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 6 Ada LovelacePainting: Alfred Edward Chalon Ada Lovelace (1815–1852) was an English mathematician and writer, chiefly known for her work on using Charles Babbage's planned mechanical general-purpose computer, the Analytical Engine. Her notes include what is recognised as the first algorithm intended to be carried out by a machine, and as such she is often regarded as the first computer programmer. More selected portraits Image 7 Rory KennedyPhotograph credit: Lyndie Benson Rory Kennedy (born December 12, 1968) is an American documentary filmmaker and the youngest child of U.S. senator Robert Kennedy and Ethel Skakel. Born six months after the assassination of her father, her life has seen many tragedies. As a director and producer, she has made documentary films that center on social issues such as addiction, nuclear radiation, the treatment of prisoners of war, and the politics of the Mexican border fence. Her films have been featured on many TV networks, and her 2014 documentary Last Days in Vietnam was nominated for an Academy Award. More selected portraits Image 8 Pedro II of BrazilPhoto: Mathew Brady/Levin Corbin Handy Emperor of Brazil Pedro II was the second and last ruler of the Empire of Brazil, reigning for over 58 years. Born in Rio de Janeiro, his father Pedro I's abrupt abdication and flight to Europe in 1831 left him as Emperor at the age of five. Inheriting an Empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II turned Brazil into an emerging power in the international arena. On November 15, 1889, he was overthrown in a coup d'état by a clique of military leaders who declared Brazil a republic. However, he had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support, and did not support any attempt to restore the monarchy. More selected portraits Image 9 Maxim GorkyPhoto: Herman Mishkin; Restoration: Fallschirmjäger Maxim Gorky (1868–1936) was a Russian political activist and writer who helped establish the Socialist Realism literary method. This portrait dates from a trip Gorky made to the United States in 1906, on which he raised funds for the Bolsheviks. During this trip he wrote his novel The Mother. More selected portraits Image 10 Raden SalehPainting: Friedrich Carl Albert Schreuel Raden Saleh (1811–1880) was a Romantic painter of Arab-Javanese ethnicity from the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia). Born in Semarang, in 1829 he was sent to the Netherlands to study portraiture and landscape painting under artists such as Cornelis Kruseman and Andreas Schelfhout. Upon returning to Java in 1851, Saleh focused predominantly on the day-to-day lives of the Javanese, although he also completed his magnum opus, The Arrest of Pangeran Diponegoro, in this period. This painting, though long thought to be a self-portrait, is now attributed to Friedrich Carl Albert Schreuel, a German artist whom Saleh knew during his time in Europe. More selected portraits Image 11 Thomas CranmerPainting: Gerlach Flicke Thomas Cranmer (1489–1556, depicted in 1545) was a leader of the English Reformation and Archbishop of Canterbury during the reigns of three monarchs. Ascending to power during the reign of Henry VIII, under Edward VI he was able to promote a series of reforms in the Church of England. He was executed for treason under Mary I. More selected portraits Image 12 Chandos portraitArtist: Attributed to John Taylor The Chandos portrait is a famous painting believed to depict William Shakespeare, and is named after James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos, who owned the portrait. It has not been possible to solve the question of who painted the portrait or whether it really depicts Shakespeare. However, in 2006 the National Portrait Gallery in London concluded that the Chandos portrait was the most likely to be a representation of Shakespeare. More selected portraits Image 13 Francisco GoyaPainting: Vicente López y Portaña Francisco Goya (1746–1828) was a Spanish romantic painter and printmaker regarded as both the last of the Old Masters and the first of the moderns. Goya was a court painter to the Spanish Crown, and through his works was both a commentator on and chronicler of his era. This portrait was completed when Goya was 80 years old. More selected portraits Image 14 Elizabeth II of the United KingdomPhoto credit: NASA Elizabeth II is the Queen regnant of sixteen independent states and their overseas territories and dependencies. Though she holds each crown and title separately and equally, she is resident in and most directly involved with the United Kingdom. She is currently the second longest serving head of state in the world. The 16 countries of which she is Queen are known as Commonwealth Realms, and their combined population is over 129 million. In practice she herself wields almost no political power in any of her realms. More selected portraits Image 15 Enrico CarusoPhoto: Bain News Service; Restoration: Michel Vuijlsteke Enrico Caruso (1873–1921) was an Italian tenor who was one of the most famous male opera singers in history. He sang to great acclaim at major opera houses around the world, and spent 18 consecutive seasons as the lead tenor at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City. He was one of the first major classical vocalists to make numerous recordings (more than 260), and his 1902 recording of "Vesti la giubba" was the first to sell over a million copies. His records sold so well that the Collector's Guide to Victor Records asks, "Did the phonograph make Caruso, or did Caruso make the phonograph?" More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 20 Births 1889 - Edwin Hubble, American astronomer (d. 1953) 1907 - Henri-Georges Clouzot, French film director (d. 1977) 1908 - Alistair Cooke, British-born journalist (d. 2004) 1925 - Robert F. Kennedy, American politician (d. 1968) (pictured) 1932 - Richard Dawson, British actor, Game Show Host 1996 - Shafayet Ahamed Shoyeb, Deaths 1910 (N.S.) - Leo Tolstoy, Russian novelist (b. 1828) 1954 - Clyde Vernon Cessna, aviation pioneer (Cessna) (b. 1879) 1975 - Francisco Franco, Head of State of Spain (1936-1975) (b. 1892) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 16 November 2021 – The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) 15 November 2021 – China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) 10 November 2021 – Politics of Sweden Swedish Prime Minister Stefan Löfven resigns after seven years in office, although he will continue to remain in office ad interim until a new government is formed. Minister for Finance Magdalena Andersson, who succeeded Löfven as leader of the Social Democratic Party on November 4, is expected to become the first female prime minister in the country's history. (ABC News) 29 October 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Myanmar coup d'état U Win Htein, aide to the deposed Burmese leader Aung San Suu Kyi, is sentenced to 20 years in prison for sedition. Htein became the first politician arrested in the aftermath of the February 2021 coup to be convicted. (Deutsche Welle) 28 October 2021 – The new leader of the Islamic State – West Africa Province has been killed during a military operation this month, two weeks after the death of the group's leader Abu Musab al-Barnawi was announced. (Reuters) Updated: 21:33, 19 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "I have but one passion: to enlighten those who have been kept in the dark, in the name of humanity which has suffered so much and is entitled to happiness. My fiery protest is simply the cry of my very soul." — Émile Zola In "J'accuse…!", L'Aurore 13 January 1898 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Autobiography A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Buckner c.?1860–70 Simon Bolivar Buckner (/?sa?m?n ?b?l?v?r ?b?kn?r/ SY-m?n BOL-i-v?r BUK-n?r; April 1, 1823 – January 8, 1914) was an American soldier, Confederate combatant, and politician. He fought in the United States Army in the Mexican–American War. He later fought in the Confederate States Army during the American Civil War. After the war, he served as the 30th governor of Kentucky. After graduating from the United States Military Academy at West Point, Buckner became an instructor there. He took a hiatus from teaching to serve in the Mexican–American War, participating in many of the major battles of that conflict. He resigned from the army in 1855 to manage his father-in-law's real estate in Chicago, Illinois. He returned to his native state of Kentucky in 1857 and was appointed adjutant general by Governor Beriah Magoffin in 1861. In this position, he tried to enforce Kentucky's neutrality policy in the early days of the Civil War. When the state's neutrality was breached, Buckner accepted a commission in the Confederate Army after declining a similar commission to the Union Army. In 1862, he accepted Ulysses S. Grant's demand for an "unconditional surrender" at the Battle of Fort Donelson. He was the first Confederate general to surrender an army in the war. He spent five months as a prisoner of war. After his release, Buckner participated in Braxton Bragg's failed invasion of Kentucky and near the end of the war became chief of staff to Edmund Kirby Smith in the Trans-Mississippi Department. (Full article...) Image 2 Peter Badcock c. 1954 Peter John Badcoe, VC (11 January 1934 – 7 April 1967) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest award for gallantry in battle that could be awarded at that time to a member of the Australian armed forces. Badcoe, born Peter Badcock, joined the Australian Army in 1950 and graduated from the Officer Cadet School, Portsea, in 1952 as a second lieutenant in the Royal Australian Artillery. A series of regimental postings followed, including a tour in the Federation of Malaya in 1962, during which he spent a week in South Vietnam observing the fighting. During the previous year, Badcock had changed his surname to Badcoe. After another regimental posting, he transferred to the Royal Australian Infantry Corps, and was promoted to major. In August 1966, Badcoe arrived in South Vietnam as a member of the Australian Army Training Team Vietnam. He was initially a sub-sector adviser, but in December became the operations adviser for Th?a Thiên-Hu? Province. In this role, between February and April 1967, he displayed conspicuous gallantry and leadership on three occasions while on operations with South Vietnamese Regional Force units. In the final battle, he was killed by a burst of machine-gun fire. He was highly respected by both his South Vietnamese and United States allies, and was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross for his actions. He was also awarded the United States Silver Star and several South Vietnamese medals. He was buried at Terendak Garrison Cemetery in Malaysia. (Full article...) Image 3 Brooks in October 2011 Phillip Jack Brooks (born October 26, 1978), better known by the ring name CM Punk, is an American professional wrestler, actor, professional mixed martial arts commentator and retired mixed martial artist, currently signed to All Elite Wrestling (AEW). He is best known for his time in WWE, where his 434-day reign as WWE Champion stands as the sixth-longest in title history. He is also signed to Cage Fury Fighting Championships (CFFC) as a commentator. Brooks began his professional wrestling career in 1999 on the independent circuit, mainly with Ring of Honor (ROH), winning the ROH World Championship once. He signed with World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) in 2005, and won the WWE Championship twice, the World Heavyweight Championship three times, and the Intercontinental Championship and the ECW World Heavyweight Championship once each. Brooks also won the World Tag Team Championship, becoming WWE's 19th Triple Crown Champion; the fastest wrestler to achieve this feat, in 203 days. He is also the only back-to-back Money in the Bank winner, has headlined several WWE pay-per-view events, won Superstar of the Year at the 2011 Slammy Awards, and was voted Wrestler of the Year in 2011 and 2012 by readers of Pro Wrestling Illustrated. After becoming disillusioned with WWE, Brooks acrimoniously departed the company and retired from professional wrestling in 2014. After much speculation, he eventually returned and joined AEW in 2021. (Full article...) Image 4 Wing Commander Brill, July 1944 William Lloyd Brill, DSO, DFC & Bar (17 May 1916 – 12 October 1964) was a senior officer and bomber pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). Born in the Riverina district of New South Wales, he was a farmer and a member of the Militia before joining the RAAF in 1940. After training in Australia and Canada, he was posted to Britain in 1941 to take part in the air war over Europe. Brill first saw combat with No. 460 Squadron RAAF, flying Vickers Wellington medium bombers. He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC) in May 1942 for attacking a target after his plane was badly damaged by anti-aircraft fire. Following assignment as an instructor with the Royal Air Force (RAF), he returned to the bombing campaign in January 1944 as a flight commander with No. 463 Squadron RAAF, flying Avro Lancaster heavy bombers. Brill's leadership and determination to complete his missions despite damage to his aircraft—on one occasion inflicted by another Lancaster's bombs from above—earned him the Distinguished Service Order. Promoted to wing commander in May 1944, he took over No. 467 Squadron RAAF after the death in combat of its then-commander, Group Captain John Balmer. Brill was awarded a bar to his DFC in July, for his skill in evading three German night fighters. Returning to Australia, he remained in the Air Force after the war and led No. 10 Squadron in 1949–50. He went on to command air bases at Rathmines, Canberra and Townsville during the 1950s and 1960s. Brill served two terms as RAAF Director of Personnel Services, in 1956–59 and 1960–63, by which time he had been promoted to group captain. His final posting was at the Department of Air in Canberra. He died of a heart attack in October 1964. (Full article...) Image 5 Toshack in about 1947 Ernie Toshack was a member of Donald Bradman's famous Australian cricket team, which toured England in 1948 and was undefeated in their 34 matches. This unprecedented feat by a Test side touring England earned Bradman's men the sobriquet The Invincibles. A left-arm medium-pace seam bowler, Toshack was a member of the first-choice team, and played in the first four Test matches before succumbing to a persistent knee injury. Toshack contained the English batsmen with leg theory in between the new ball bursts of Keith Miller and Ray Lindwall. He took 11 wickets in the Tests; his most notable performance was the 5/40 he took in the second innings of the Second Test at Lord's. However, his knee failed in the first innings of the Fourth Test when he took 1/112. He was unable to bowl in the second innings and missed the Fifth Test, marking the end of his Test career. (Full article...) Image 6 Jackson performing in June 1988 Michael Joseph Jackson (August 29, 1958 – June 25, 2009) was an American singer, songwriter and dancer. Dubbed the "King of Pop", he is regarded as one of the most significant cultural figures of the 20th century. Over a four-decade career, his contributions to music, dance and fashion, along with his publicized personal life, made him a global figure in popular culture. Jackson influenced artists across many music genres; through stage and video performances, he popularized complicated dance moves such as the moonwalk, to which he gave the name, as well as the robot. He is the most awarded music artist in history. The eighth child of the Jackson family, Jackson made his professional debut in 1964 with his elder brothers Jackie, Tito, Jermaine and Marlon as a member of the Jackson 5 (later known as the Jacksons). Jackson began his solo career in 1971 while at Motown Records. He became a solo star with his 1979 album Off the Wall. His music videos, including those for "Beat It", "Billie Jean" and "Thriller" from his 1982 album Thriller, are credited with breaking racial barriers and transforming the medium into an artform and promotional tool. He helped propel the success of MTV and continued to innovate with videos for the albums Bad (1987), Dangerous (1991) and HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I (1995). Thriller became the best-selling album of all time, while Bad was the first album to produce five U.S. Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles. (Full article...) Image 7 Olga Alexandrovna circa 1910 Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia (Russian: ?????? ??????????????; 13 June [O.S. 1 June] 1882 – 24 November 1960) was the youngest child of Emperor Alexander III of Russia and younger sister of Emperor Nicholas II. She was raised at the Gatchina Palace outside Saint Petersburg. Olga's relationship with her mother, Empress Marie, the daughter of King Christian IX of Denmark, was strained and distant from childhood. In contrast, she and her father were close. He died when she was 12, and her brother Nicholas became emperor. (Full article...) Image 8 Innis in the 1920s Harold Adams Innis FRSC (November 5, 1894 – November 9, 1952) was a Canadian professor of political economy at the University of Toronto and the author of seminal works on media, communication theory, and Canadian economic history. He helped develop the staples thesis, which holds that Canada's culture, political history, and economy have been decisively influenced by the exploitation and export of a series of "staples" such as fur, fish, lumber, wheat, mined metals, and coal. The staple thesis dominated economic history in Canada from the 1930s to 1960s, and continues to be a fundamental part of the Canadian political economic tradition. Innis's writings on communication explore the role of media in shaping the culture and development of civilizations. He argued, for example, that a balance between oral and written forms of communication contributed to the flourishing of Greek civilization in the 5th century BC. He warned, however, that Western civilization is now imperiled by powerful, advertising-driven media obsessed by "present-mindedness" and the "continuous, systematic, ruthless destruction of elements of permanence essential to cultural activity." His intellectual bond with Eric A. Havelock formed the foundations of the Toronto School of communication theory, which provided a source of inspiration for future members of the school: Marshall McLuhan and Edmund Snow Carpenter. (Full article...) Image 9 Anna Anderson (16 December 1896 – 12 February 1984) was an impostor who claimed to be Grand Duchess Anastasia of Russia. Anastasia, the youngest daughter of the last Tsar and Tsarina of Russia, Nicholas II and Alexandra, was murdered along with her parents and siblings on 17 July 1918 by communist revolutionaries in Yekaterinburg, Russia, but the location of her body was unknown until 2007. In 1920, Anderson was institutionalized in a mental hospital after a suicide attempt in Berlin. At first, she went by the name Fräulein Unbekannt (German for Miss Unknown) as she refused to reveal her identity. Later, she used the name Tschaikovsky and then Anderson. In March 1922, claims that Anderson was a Russian grand duchess first received public attention. Most members of Grand Duchess Anastasia's family and those who had known her, including court tutor Pierre Gilliard, said Anderson was an impostor but others were convinced she was Anastasia. In 1927, a private investigation funded by the Tsarina's brother, Ernest Louis, Grand Duke of Hesse, identified Anderson as Franziska Schanzkowska, a Polish factory worker with a history of mental illness. After a lawsuit lasting many years, the German courts ruled that Anderson had failed to prove she was Anastasia, but through media coverage, her claim gained notoriety. (Full article...) Image 10 Vance Drummond at Kimpo, South Korea, 1951 Vance Drummond, DFC, AFC (22 February 1927 – 17 May 1967) was a New Zealand–born Australian pilot who fought in the Korean and Vietnam Wars. He initially saw service in the New Zealand military, but joined the Royal Australian Air Force in 1949 and graduated as a sergeant pilot in 1951. Posted to No. 77 Squadron in Korea, he flew Gloster Meteor jet fighters and earned the US Air Medal for his combat skills. He was shot down by a Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15 in December 1951 and imprisoned for almost two years. After returning to Australia he converted to CAC Sabre jets and in December 1961 became a flight commander with No. 75 Squadron; he subsequently led the squadron's Black Diamonds aerobatic team, and was awarded the Air Force Cross in 1965. Drummond was promoted to acting wing commander in December 1965 and posted to South Vietnam on staff duties with the United States Air Force. He joined the US Air Force's 19th Tactical Air Support Squadron, operating Cessna Bird Dog aircraft, as a forward air controller in July 1966. That month he earned the Distinguished Flying Cross for his part in rescuing a company of soldiers surrounded by Viet Cong forces. In October he was awarded the South Vietnamese Cross of Gallantry with Silver Star. Drummond took command of No. 3 Squadron, flying Dassault Mirage IIIO supersonic fighters out of Williamtown, New South Wales, in February 1967. His Mirage crashed into the sea during a training exercise on 17 May; neither Drummond nor the plane was found. (Full article...) Image 11 Photograph by W. & D. Downey, c.?1889 Alexandra of Denmark (Alexandra Caroline Marie Charlotte Louise Julia; 1 December 1844 – 20 November 1925) was Queen of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions and Empress of India from 22 January 1901 to 6 May 1910 as the wife of King-Emperor Edward VII. Alexandra's family had been relatively obscure until 1852, when her father, Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg, was chosen with the consent of the major European powers to succeed his second cousin Frederick VII as king of Denmark. At the age of sixteen Alexandra was chosen as the future wife of Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, the heir apparent of Queen Victoria. The couple married eighteen months later in 1863, the year in which her father became king of Denmark as Christian IX and her brother was appointed king of Greece as George I. She was Princess of Wales from 1863 to 1901, the longest anyone has ever held that title, and became generally popular; her style of dress and bearing were copied by fashion-conscious women. Largely excluded from wielding any political power, she unsuccessfully attempted to sway the opinion of British ministers and her husband's family to favour Greek and Danish interests. Her public duties were restricted to uncontroversial involvement in charitable work. (Full article...) Image 12 Self-portrait photograph Bronwyn Bancroft (born 1958) is an Australian artist, and amongst the first Australian fashion designers invited to show her work in Paris. Born in Tenterfield, New South Wales, and trained in Canberra and Sydney, Bancroft worked as a fashion designer, and is an artist, illustrator, and arts administrator. In 1985, Bancroft established a shop called Designer Aboriginals, selling fabrics made by Aboriginal artists including herself. She was a founding member of Boomalli Aboriginal Artists Co-operative. Art work by Bancroft is held by the National Gallery of Australia, the Art Gallery of New South Wales and the Art Gallery of Western Australia. She has provided art work for more than 20 children's books, including Stradbroke Dreamtime by writer and activist Oodgeroo Noonuccal, and books by artist and writer Sally Morgan. She has received design commissions, including one for the exterior of a sports centre in Sydney. (Full article...) Image 13 The Accord of Winchester, 1072. Thomas' signature is on the right, next to Lanfranc's. Thomas of Bayeux (died 18 November 1100) was Archbishop of York from 1070 until 1100. He was educated at Liège and became a royal chaplain to Duke William of Normandy, who later became King William I of England. After the Norman Conquest, the king nominated Thomas to succeed Ealdred as Archbishop of York. After Thomas' election, Lanfranc, Archbishop of Canterbury, demanded an oath from Thomas to obey him and any future Archbishops of Canterbury; this was part of Lanfranc's claim that Canterbury was the primary bishopric, and its holder the head of the English Church. Thomas countered that York had never made such an oath. As a result, Lanfranc refused to consecrate him. The King eventually persuaded Thomas to submit, but Thomas and Lanfranc continued to clash over ecclesiastical issues, including the primacy of Canterbury, which dioceses belonged to the province of York, and the question of how York's obedience to Canterbury would be expressed. After King William I's death Thomas served his successor, William II, and helped to put down a rebellion led by Thomas' old mentor Odo of Bayeux. Thomas also attended the trial for rebellion of the Bishop of Durham, William de St-Calais, Thomas' sole suffragan, or bishop subordinate to York. During William II's reign Thomas once more became involved in the dispute with Canterbury over the primacy when he refused to consecrate the new Archbishop of Canterbury, Anselm, if Anselm was named the Primate of England in the consecration service. After William II's sudden death in 1100, Thomas arrived too late to crown King Henry I, and died soon after the coronation. (Full article...) Image 14 Kentikian in 2018 Susianna "Susi" Levonovna Kentikian (Russian: ??????? (????) ????????? ????????, Armenian: ?????? ?????????; born Syuzanna Kentikyan on 11 September 1987) is an Armenian-German former professional boxer who competed from 2005 to 2016. She was born in Yerevan, Armenian SSR, but left the country with her family at the age of five because of the First Nagorno-Karabakh War. Kentikian has lived in Hamburg since 1996 and began boxing at the age of twelve. Following a successful amateur career, she turned professional in 2005 upon signing with the Hamburg-based Spotlight Boxing promotion. Kentikian is a two-time flyweight world champion, having held the World Boxing Association (WBA) female title from 2007 to 2012, and from 2013 to 2017. Additionally, she was the World Boxing Organization (WBO) flyweight champion from 2009 to 2012, and held the Women's International Boxing Federation (WIBF) title from 2007 to 2012 and 2015 to 2017. During the 2009 WBA convention in Colombia she was named the first ever WBA female Super Champion. It was announced that this belt would be called "Susi Kentikian belt" for all other future Super Champions. (Full article...) Image 15 Davies in 2008 Stephen Russell Davies OBE (born 27 April 1963), better known as Russell T Davies, is a Welsh screenwriter and television producer whose works include Queer as Folk, The Second Coming, Casanova, the 2005 revival of the BBC One science fiction franchise Doctor Who, Cucumber, Years and Years and It's a Sin. Born in Swansea, Davies had aspirations as a comic artist before focusing on being a playwright and screenwriter. After graduating from Oxford University, he joined the BBC's children's department, CBBC, in 1985 on a part-time basis and held various positions, which included creating two series, Dark Season and Century Falls. He eventually left the BBC for Granada Television, and in 1994 began writing adult television drama. His early scripts generally explored concepts of religion and sexuality among various backdrops: Revelations was a soap opera about organised religion and featured a lesbian vicar; Springhill was a soap drama about a Catholic family in contemporary Liverpool; The Grand explored society's opinion of subjects such as prostitution, abortion and homosexuality during the interwar period; and Queer as Folk recreated his experiences in the Manchester gay scene. His work in the 2000s included Bob & Rose, which portrayed a gay man who fell in love with a woman; The Second Coming, which focused on the second coming and deicide of Jesus Christ from a mostly non-religious point of view; Mine All Mine, a comedy about a family who discover they own the entire city of Swansea; and Casanova, an adaptation of the complete memoirs of Venetian adventurer Giacomo Casanova. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that experimental musician John Olson has been called a "sort of bizarro influencer" because of his habit of "chaotic shitposting"? ... that the New South Wales Governor's Body Guard of Light Horse seemed to have been absent when Governor William Bligh was arrested during the Rum Rebellion? ... that Edward Hewitt Nichols, the first leader of Hong Kong's Country Parks administrations, oversaw the designation of 40 per cent of the territory as parkland? ... that British educator Thomas Lucas created an embossed shorthand to teach the blind to read by touch around 1830–1832, before the introduction of braille in the UK? ... that on the day she began filming her first starring role in Ginger, nine-year-old Jane Withers received congratulatory bouquets from W. C. Fields and President Franklin D. Roosevelt? ... that Eugene C. Barker was involved in the "biggest bear fight" in Texas history with Governor James E. Ferguson, but Barker kept his job and Ferguson was later impeached? ... that scientist KC Claffy was inducted into the Internet Hall of Fame for her work on measuring the Internet? ... that Izkia Siches, who was re-elected as president of the Chilean Medical College in 2020, has ruled out running for President of Chile in 2021? ... that the termite Macrotermes michaelseni is considered to be an ecosystem engineer in the Okavango Delta in Botswana? ... that the biography of Karin Boye, written by Swedish literary critic Margit Abenius, was criticised for the conservative analysis of Boye's homosexuality? ... that African American Ivory Winston sang for President Harry S. Truman's birthday and was "Iowa's First Lady of Song"? ... that the writer of the hymn "Angel Voices, Ever Singing" banned it from being published with a tune composed by Arthur Sullivan? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 2Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 3Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 4Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Image 5James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 6John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 7Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 8Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Morgan PresselPhotograph: Keith Allison; Edit: Brandmeister American professional golfer Morgan Pressel, who first qualified for the Women's Open at age 12. Pressel had her first victory in the Kraft Nabisco Championship in 2007. She made her first professional hole-in-one, an eagle, at that year's Jamie Farr Owens Corning Classic. More selected portraits Image 2 Brian NankervisPhoto: John O'Neill; edit: JJ Harrison Brian Nankervis (b. 1956), an Australian comedian and writer, shown here during a live performance. Nankervis rose to popularity while playing Raymond J. Bartholomeuz on Hey Hey It's Saturday; since 2005 he has been a host of the gameshow RocKwiz. More selected portraits Image 3 Alice ManfieldPhoto: Unknown; Restoration: John O'Neill Alice Manfield (1878–1960), commonly known as Guide Alice, was a mountain guide, amateur naturalist, chalet owner, photographer, and early feminist figure from Victoria, Australia. Her pioneering work at Mount Buffalo from the 1890s to the 1930s led to her becoming a tourist attraction in her own right, and helped lead to the establishment of the Mount Buffalo National Park. Manfield's parents ran a hotel at Mount Buffalo, and she led tours up the mountain from her youth. Because of her enthusiasm and extensive knowledge of the area, she quickly became a highly sought-after guide. She continued guiding tourists until the 1930s. More selected portraits Image 4 John Henry NewmanPainting: John Everett Millais John Henry Newman (1801–90) was a British cleric and leader in the Oxford Movement, a group of Anglicans who wished to return the Church of England to many Catholic beliefs and forms of worship traditional in the medieval times. In 1845 Newman converted to Catholicism, eventually rising to cardinal. More selected portraits Image 5 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 6 Ada LovelacePainting: Alfred Edward Chalon Ada Lovelace (1815–1852) was an English mathematician and writer, chiefly known for her work on using Charles Babbage's planned mechanical general-purpose computer, the Analytical Engine. Her notes include what is recognised as the first algorithm intended to be carried out by a machine, and as such she is often regarded as the first computer programmer. More selected portraits Image 7 Rory KennedyPhotograph credit: Lyndie Benson Rory Kennedy (born December 12, 1968) is an American documentary filmmaker and the youngest child of U.S. senator Robert Kennedy and Ethel Skakel. Born six months after the assassination of her father, her life has seen many tragedies. As a director and producer, she has made documentary films that center on social issues such as addiction, nuclear radiation, the treatment of prisoners of war, and the politics of the Mexican border fence. Her films have been featured on many TV networks, and her 2014 documentary Last Days in Vietnam was nominated for an Academy Award. More selected portraits Image 8 Pedro II of BrazilPhoto: Mathew Brady/Levin Corbin Handy Emperor of Brazil Pedro II was the second and last ruler of the Empire of Brazil, reigning for over 58 years. Born in Rio de Janeiro, his father Pedro I's abrupt abdication and flight to Europe in 1831 left him as Emperor at the age of five. Inheriting an Empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II turned Brazil into an emerging power in the international arena. On November 15, 1889, he was overthrown in a coup d'état by a clique of military leaders who declared Brazil a republic. However, he had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support, and did not support any attempt to restore the monarchy. More selected portraits Image 9 Maxim GorkyPhoto: Herman Mishkin; Restoration: Fallschirmjäger Maxim Gorky (1868–1936) was a Russian political activist and writer who helped establish the Socialist Realism literary method. This portrait dates from a trip Gorky made to the United States in 1906, on which he raised funds for the Bolsheviks. During this trip he wrote his novel The Mother. More selected portraits Image 10 Raden SalehPainting: Friedrich Carl Albert Schreuel Raden Saleh (1811–1880) was a Romantic painter of Arab-Javanese ethnicity from the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia). Born in Semarang, in 1829 he was sent to the Netherlands to study portraiture and landscape painting under artists such as Cornelis Kruseman and Andreas Schelfhout. Upon returning to Java in 1851, Saleh focused predominantly on the day-to-day lives of the Javanese, although he also completed his magnum opus, The Arrest of Pangeran Diponegoro, in this period. This painting, though long thought to be a self-portrait, is now attributed to Friedrich Carl Albert Schreuel, a German artist whom Saleh knew during his time in Europe. More selected portraits Image 11 Thomas CranmerPainting: Gerlach Flicke Thomas Cranmer (1489–1556, depicted in 1545) was a leader of the English Reformation and Archbishop of Canterbury during the reigns of three monarchs. Ascending to power during the reign of Henry VIII, under Edward VI he was able to promote a series of reforms in the Church of England. He was executed for treason under Mary I. More selected portraits Image 12 Chandos portraitArtist: Attributed to John Taylor The Chandos portrait is a famous painting believed to depict William Shakespeare, and is named after James Brydges, 1st Duke of Chandos, who owned the portrait. It has not been possible to solve the question of who painted the portrait or whether it really depicts Shakespeare. However, in 2006 the National Portrait Gallery in London concluded that the Chandos portrait was the most likely to be a representation of Shakespeare. More selected portraits Image 13 Francisco GoyaPainting: Vicente López y Portaña Francisco Goya (1746–1828) was a Spanish romantic painter and printmaker regarded as both the last of the Old Masters and the first of the moderns. Goya was a court painter to the Spanish Crown, and through his works was both a commentator on and chronicler of his era. This portrait was completed when Goya was 80 years old. More selected portraits Image 14 Elizabeth II of the United KingdomPhoto credit: NASA Elizabeth II is the Queen regnant of sixteen independent states and their overseas territories and dependencies. Though she holds each crown and title separately and equally, she is resident in and most directly involved with the United Kingdom. She is currently the second longest serving head of state in the world. The 16 countries of which she is Queen are known as Commonwealth Realms, and their combined population is over 129 million. In practice she herself wields almost no political power in any of her realms. More selected portraits Image 15 Enrico CarusoPhoto: Bain News Service; Restoration: Michel Vuijlsteke Enrico Caruso (1873–1921) was an Italian tenor who was one of the most famous male opera singers in history. He sang to great acclaim at major opera houses around the world, and spent 18 consecutive seasons as the lead tenor at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City. He was one of the first major classical vocalists to make numerous recordings (more than 260), and his 1902 recording of "Vesti la giubba" was the first to sell over a million copies. His records sold so well that the Collector's Guide to Victor Records asks, "Did the phonograph make Caruso, or did Caruso make the phonograph?" More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 20 Births 1889 - Edwin Hubble, American astronomer (d. 1953) 1907 - Henri-Georges Clouzot, French film director (d. 1977) 1908 - Alistair Cooke, British-born journalist (d. 2004) 1925 - Robert F. Kennedy, American politician (d. 1968) (pictured) 1932 - Richard Dawson, British actor, Game Show Host 1996 - Shafayet Ahamed Shoyeb, Deaths 1910 (N.S.) - Leo Tolstoy, Russian novelist (b. 1828) 1954 - Clyde Vernon Cessna, aviation pioneer (Cessna) (b. 1879) 1975 - Francisco Franco, Head of State of Spain (1936-1975) (b. 1892) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 16 November 2021 – The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) 15 November 2021 – China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) 10 November 2021 – Politics of Sweden Swedish Prime Minister Stefan Löfven resigns after seven years in office, although he will continue to remain in office ad interim until a new government is formed. Minister for Finance Magdalena Andersson, who succeeded Löfven as leader of the Social Democratic Party on November 4, is expected to become the first female prime minister in the country's history. (ABC News) 29 October 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Myanmar coup d'état U Win Htein, aide to the deposed Burmese leader Aung San Suu Kyi, is sentenced to 20 years in prison for sedition. Htein became the first politician arrested in the aftermath of the February 2021 coup to be convicted. (Deutsche Welle) 28 October 2021 – The new leader of the Islamic State – West Africa Province has been killed during a military operation this month, two weeks after the death of the group's leader Abu Musab al-Barnawi was announced. (Reuters) Updated: 21:33, 19 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "I have but one passion: to enlighten those who have been kept in the dark, in the name of humanity which has suffered so much and is entitled to happiness. My fiery protest is simply the cry of my very soul." — Émile Zola In "J'accuse…!", L'Aurore 13 January 1898 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Foxe's Book of Martyrs A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Feller in 1996 Robert William Andrew Feller (November 3, 1918 – December 15, 2010), nicknamed "The Heater from Van Meter", "Bullet Bob", and "Rapid Robert", was an American baseball pitcher who played 18 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the Cleveland Indians. Feller pitched from 1936 to 1941 and from 1945 to 1956, interrupted by a four-year engagement in the United States Navy. In a career spanning 570 games, Feller pitched 3,827 innings and posted a win–loss record of 266–162, with 279 complete games, 44 shutouts, and a 3.25 earned run average (ERA). A prodigy who bypassed baseball's minor leagues, Feller first played for the Indians at the age of 17. His career was interrupted by four years of military service in World War II, during which time he served as Chief Petty Officer aboard USS Alabama. Feller became the first pitcher to win 24 games in a season before the age of 21. During his career, he threw no-hitters, in 1940, 1946, and 1951. Feller also recorded 12 one-hitters (his no-hitters and one-hitters were records at the time of his retirement). He helped the Indians win a World Series title in 1948 and an American League-record 111 wins and the pennant in 1954. Feller led the American League in wins six times and in strikeouts seven times. In 1946, he recorded 348 strikeouts, a total not exceeded for 19 years. An eight-time All-Star, Feller was ranked 36th on Sporting News's list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players and was named the publication's "greatest pitcher of his time". He was a finalist for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team in 1999. (Full article...) Image 2 Afonso at age 2 wearing the blue band of the Order of the Southern Cross, 1846 Dom Afonso (23 February 1845 – 11 June 1847) was the Prince Imperial and heir apparent to the throne of the Empire of Brazil. Born in Rio de Janeiro, he was the eldest child of Emperor Dom Pedro II and Dona Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies, and thus a member of the Brazilian branch of the House of Braganza. Afonso died from epilepsy at the age of two, devastating the emperor. The following year, Pedro and Teresa Cristina had another son, Pedro Afonso, but he too died in infancy. After the loss of his second son, doubts grew in Pedro II's mind that the imperial system could be viable. He still had an heir in his daughter Isabel, but he was unconvinced that a female would prove to be a suitable successor. He showed less concern about the effects his policies had on the monarchy, provided his daughter Isabel with no training for her role as potential empress, and failed to cultivate her acceptance within the country's political class. Pedro II's lack of interest in protecting the imperial system ultimately led to its downfall. (Full article...) Image 3 The location of Deusdedit's unmarked grave, at St Augustine's Abbey in Canterbury. The graves marked with stones are those of Justus, Mellitus, and Laurence. Deusdedit (died c. 664) was a medieval Archbishop of Canterbury, the first native-born holder of the see of Canterbury. By birth an Anglo-Saxon, he became archbishop in 655 and held the office for more than nine years until his death, probably from plague. Deusdedit's successor as archbishop was one of his priests at Canterbury. There is some controversy over the exact date of Deusdedit's death, owing to discrepancies in the medieval written work that records his life. Little is known about his episcopate, but he was considered to be a saint after his demise. A saint's life was written after his relics were moved from their original burial place in 1091. (Full article...) Image 4 Captain James Newland c.1918 James Ernest Newland, VC (22 August 1881 – 19 March 1949) was an Australian soldier, policeman and a recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest decoration for gallantry "in the face of the enemy" that can be awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth armed forces. Newland was awarded the Victoria Cross following three separate actions in April 1917, during attacks against German forces retreating to the Hindenburg Line. While in command of a company, Newland successfully led his men in several assaults on German positions and repulsed subsequent counter-attacks. Born in the Victorian town of Highton, Newland joined the Australian military in 1899 and saw active service during the Second Boer War. He continued to serve in the Australian Army's permanent forces on his return to Australia, and completed several years' service in the artillery. Transferring to the militia in 1907, Newland became a police officer in Tasmania before re-joining the permanent forces in 1910. Following the outbreak of the First World War, he was appointed to the Australian Imperial Force and was among the first wave of men to land at Gallipoli. In the days following the landing, Newland was wounded and evacuated to Egypt where he was commissioned as a second lieutenant. (Full article...) Image 5 Abe Waddington c. 1920 Abraham "Abe" Waddington, sometimes known as Abram Waddington (4 February 1893 – 28 October 1959), was a professional cricketer for Yorkshire, who played in two Test matches for England, both against Australia in 1920–21. Between 1919 and 1927 Waddington made 255 appearances for Yorkshire, and in all first-class cricket played 266 matches. In these games, he took a total of 852 wickets with his left arm fast-medium bowling. Capable of making the ball swing, Waddington was admired for the aesthetic quality of his bowling action. He was a hostile bowler who sometimes sledged opposing batsmen and questioned umpires' decisions, behaviour which was unusual during his playing days. Waddington first played for Yorkshire after the First World War, when the team had been weakened by injuries and retirements. He made an immediate impression in 1919, his first season; he took 100 wickets and was largely responsible for Yorkshire's victory in the County Championship that year. After a similarly successful season in 1920, he was selected for the 1920–21 Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) tour of Australia, during which he appeared in two of the five Tests. However, the England team were outclassed; used in an unfamiliar tactical role, Waddington took just one wicket and never played for England again. He continued to be effective for Yorkshire, particularly against the weaker counties, but was often inconsistent. His reputation as an uncompromising opponent was cemented when he was found guilty of dissent and inciting the crowd in a game against Middlesex. A succession of injuries reduced his effectiveness and he retired from first-class cricket in 1927. He continued to play league cricket and worked for the family business, a fat-refining firm, but maintained his connection with Yorkshire cricket. (Full article...) Image 6 Portrait of Willis by Mathew Brady studios, circa mid-1850s Nathaniel Parker Willis (January 20, 1806 – January 20, 1867), also known as N. P. Willis, was an American author, poet and editor who worked with several notable American writers including Edgar Allan Poe and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. He became the highest-paid magazine writer of his day. His brother was the composer Richard Storrs Willis and his sister Sara wrote under the name Fanny Fern. Harriet Jacobs wrote her autobiography while being employed as his children's nurse. Born in Portland, Maine, Willis came from a family of publishers. His grandfather Nathaniel Willis owned newspapers in Massachusetts and Virginia, and his father Nathaniel Willis was the founder of Youth's Companion, the first newspaper specifically for children. Willis developed an interest in literature while attending Yale College and began publishing poetry. After graduation, he worked as an overseas correspondent for the New York Mirror. He eventually moved to New York and began to build his literary reputation. Working with multiple publications, he was earning about $100 per article and between $5,000 and $10,000 per year. In 1846, he started his own publication, the Home Journal, which was eventually renamed Town & Country. Shortly after, Willis moved to a home on the Hudson River where he lived a semi-retired life until his death in 1867. (Full article...) Image 7 Bust in the Louvre, Paris Domitian (/d??m???n, -i?n/; Latin: Domitianus; 24 October 51 – 18 September 96) was Roman emperor from 81 to 96. He was the son of Vespasian and the younger brother of Titus, his two predecessors on the throne, and the last member of the Flavian dynasty. During his reign, the authoritarian nature of his rule put him at sharp odds with the Senate, whose powers he drastically curtailed. Domitian had a minor and largely ceremonial role during the reigns of his father and brother. After the death of his brother, Domitian was declared emperor by the Praetorian Guard. His 15-year reign was the longest since that of Tiberius. As emperor, Domitian strengthened the economy by revaluing the Roman coinage, expanded the border defenses of the empire, and initiated a massive building program to restore the damaged city of Rome. Significant wars were fought in Britain, where his general Agricola attempted to conquer Caledonia (Scotland), and in Dacia, where Domitian was unable to procure a decisive victory against King Decebalus. Domitian's government exhibited strong authoritarian characteristics. Religious, military, and cultural propaganda fostered a cult of personality, and by nominating himself perpetual censor, he sought to control public and private morals. As a consequence, Domitian was popular with the people and army, but considered a tyrant by members of the Roman Senate. (Full article...) Image 8 William Thomas Stearn /st??rn/ CBE FLS VMH (16 April 1911 – 9 May 2001) was a British botanist. Born in Cambridge in 1911, he was largely self-educated, and developed an early interest in books and natural history. His initial work experience was at a Cambridge bookshop, but he also had a position as an assistant in the university botany department. At the age of 29 he married Eldwyth Ruth Alford, who later became his collaborator. He died in London in 2001. While at the bookshop, he was offered a position as a librarian at the Royal Horticultural Society in London (1933–1952). From there he moved to the Natural History Museum as a scientific officer in the botany department (1952–1976). After his retirement, he continued working there, writing, and serving on a number of professional bodies related to his work, including the Linnean Society, of which he became president. He also taught botany at Cambridge University as a visiting professor (1977–1983). (Full article...) Image 9 George Abramovich Koval (Russian: ???? (???????) ????????? ??????, IPA: [??or? (????or???j) ??bram?v??t? k??val?] (listen), Zhorzh Abramovich Koval; December 25, 1913 – January 31, 2006) was an American who acted as a Soviet intelligence officer for the Soviet atomic bomb project. Koval's infiltration of the Manhattan Project as a GRU (Soviet military intelligence) agent reduced the time it took for Russia to develop nuclear weapons. Koval was born to Russian Jewish immigrants in Sioux City, Iowa. As an adult, he traveled with his parents to the Soviet Union to settle in the Jewish Autonomous Region near the Chinese border. Koval was recruited by the Soviet GRU (military intelligence), trained, and assigned the code name DELMAR. He returned to the United States in 1940 and was drafted into the U.S. Army in early 1943. Koval worked at atomic research laboratories and, according to the Russian government, relayed back to the Soviet Union information about the production processes and volumes of the polonium, plutonium, and uranium used in American atomic weaponry, and descriptions of the weapon production sites. In 1948, Koval left on a European vacation but never returned to the United States. In 2007, Russian President Vladimir Putin posthumously awarded Koval the Hero of the Russian Federation decoration for his service. (Full article...) Image 10 Gold dinar of al-Hafiz, minted at Alexandria in 1149 Abu'l-Maym?n ?Abd al-Maj?d ibn Mu?ammad ibn al-Mustan?ir, better known by his regnal name as al-??fi? li-D?n All?h (Arabic: ?????? ???? ?????, lit.?'Keeper of God's Religion'), was the eleventh Fatimid caliph, ruling over Egypt from 1132 to his death in 1149, and the 21st imam of Hafizi Isma'ilism. Al-Hafiz first rose to power as regent after the death of his cousin, al-Amir bi-Ahkam Allah, in October 1130. Al-Amir had only left an infant son, al-Tayyib, as a possible successor, so al-Hafiz became regent as the oldest surviving member of the dynasty. Al-Tayyib was apparently sidelined and possibly killed by the new regime, which was in turn overthrown within a few days by the army under Kutayfat. The latter imprisoned al-Hafiz, and moved to depose the Fatimids and replace Isma'ilism with a personal regime, possibly based on Twelver Shi'ism, with himself as the Hidden Imam's all-powerful vicegerent. Kutayfat's regime was toppled when he was murdered by Fatimid loyalists in December 1131, and al-Hafiz was freed and restored as regent. (Full article...) Image 11 Jane Marian Joseph (31 May 1894 – 9 March 1929) was an English composer, arranger and music teacher. She was a pupil and later associate of the composer Gustav Holst, and was instrumental in the organisation and management of various of the music festivals which Holst sponsored. Many of her works were composed for performance at these festivals and similar occasions. Her early death at age 35, which prevented the full realisation of her talents, was considered by her contemporaries as a considerable loss to English music. Holst first observed Joseph's potential when he was teaching her composition at St Paul's Girls' School. She began to act as his amanuensis in 1914, when he was composing The Planets, her special responsibility being the preparation of the score for the "Neptune" movement. She continued to assist Holst with transcriptions, arrangements and translations, and was his librettist for the choral ballet The Golden Goose. (Full article...) Image 12 Nigel Reuben Rook Williams (15 July 1944 – 21 April 1992) was an English conservator and expert on the restoration of ceramics and glass. From 1961 until his death he worked at the British Museum, where he became the Chief Conservator of Ceramics and Glass in 1983. There his work included the successful restorations of the Sutton Hoo helmet and the Portland Vase. Joining as an assistant at age 16, Williams spent his entire career, and most of his life, at the British Museum. He was one of the first people to study conservation, not yet recognised as a profession, and from an early age was given responsibility over high-profile objects. In the 1960s he assisted with the re-excavation of the Sutton Hoo ship-burial, and in his early- to mid-twenties he conserved many of the objects found therein: most notably the Sutton Hoo helmet, which occupied a year of his time. He likewise reconstructed other objects from the find, including the shield, drinking horns, and maplewood bottles. (Full article...) Image 13 Edward George Gerard (February 22, 1890 – August 7, 1937) was a Canadian professional ice hockey player, coach, and manager. Born in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, he played professionally for 10 seasons for his hometown Ottawa Senators. He spent the first three years of his playing career as a left winger before switching to defence, retiring in 1923 due to a throat ailment. Gerard won the Stanley Cup in four consecutive years from 1920 to 1923 (with the Senators three times, and as an injury replacement player with the Toronto St. Patricks in 1922), and was the first player to win the Cup four years in a row. After his playing career he served as a coach and manager, working with the Montreal Maroons from 1925 until 1929, winning the Stanley Cup in 1926. Gerard also coached the New York Americans for two seasons between 1930 and 1932, before returning to the Maroons for two more seasons. He ended his career coaching the St. Louis Eagles in 1934, before retiring due to the same throat issue that had ended his playing career. He died from complications related to it in 1937. Renowned as a talented athlete in multiple sports, Gerard first gained prominence in rugby football as a halfback for the Ottawa Rough Riders club from 1909 to 1913, though he left the sport when he moved to hockey. Outside hockey he worked initially for the Canadian government as a printer, before working in the Geodetic Survey, ultimately becoming chief engineering clerk. Well-renowned during his hockey-playing career, he was regarded as one of the best defenders of his era, and gained notice for being a tough player, though not considered violent or dirty. Gerard was one of the original nine players inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame when it was founded in 1945. He is also an inductee of Canada's Sports Hall of Fame. (Full article...) Image 14 Sheppard photographed in 1905 Katherine Wilson Sheppard (née Catherine Wilson Malcolm; 10 March 1848 – 13 July 1934) was the most prominent member of the women's suffrage movement in New Zealand and the country's most famous suffragist. Born in Liverpool, England, she emigrated to New Zealand with her family in 1868. There she became an active member of various religious and social organisations, including the Women's Christian Temperance Union New Zealand (WCTU NZ). In 1887 she was appointed the WCTU NZ's National Superintendent for Franchise and Legislation, a position she used to advance the cause of women's suffrage in New Zealand. Kate Sheppard promoted women's suffrage by organising petitions and public meetings, by writing letters to the press, and by developing contacts with politicians. She was the editor of The White Ribbon, the first woman-operated newspaper in New Zealand. Through her skilful writing and persuasive public speaking, she successfully advocated women's suffrage. Her pamphlets Ten Reasons Why the Women of New Zealand Should Vote and Should Women Vote? contributed to the cause. This work culminated in a petition with 30,000 signatures calling for women's suffrage that was presented to parliament, and the successful extension of the franchise to women in 1893. As a result, New Zealand became the first country to establish universal suffrage. (Full article...) Image 15 Viscount of Rio Branco, in 1879 José Maria da Silva Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco (16 March 1819 – 1 November 1880), was a Brazilian politician, monarchist, diplomat, teacher and journalist. Rio Branco was born in Salvador, in what was then the Captaincy of Bahia, to a wealthy family, but most of the fortune was lost after his parents' deaths early in his childhood. Rio Branco attended Brazil's Naval School and became a midshipman in 1841. Later that year he was enrolled in the Army's Military Academy, eventually becoming an instructor there. Rather than continue to serve in the military, he became a politician in the Liberal Party. In 1845, he was elected a member of the provincial house of representatives of Rio de Janeiro province, site of the national capital of the same name. Rio Branco rose to power within the province under the tutelage of Aureliano Coutinho, Viscount of Sepetiba—a veteran politician who held tremendous influence over the young and inexperienced Emperor Pedro II. He temporarily abandoned politics after Aureliano Coutinho's fall from grace and the subsequent dissolution of the Liberal Party. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that after they met, evolutionary scientist Charles Darwin described Thomas Parr as an "old, miserly squire"? ... that educator Mildred Hope Fisher Wood was the originator of learning-disability courses, which she taught to prospective teachers at the University of Northern Iowa? ... that electronics engineer Chen Xingbi was inducted into the ISPSD Hall of Fame for his invention of superjunction power semiconductor devices? ... that the work of Sudanese visual artist Rashid Mahdi was discovered by a French photographer in the dusty backrooms of several stores? ... that Robert Adam's plans for Kirkdale Bridge were substantially more elaborate than the structure that Sir Samuel Hannay was eventually willing to pay for on his estate in Dumfries and Galloway? ... that NASA scientist Scott Sandford wrote that apples and oranges can be compared? ... that despite suffering from vertigo, actor Bob Barrett performed his own stunt on the hospital rooftop in the Holby City episode "Man Down"? ... that during the Nazi occupation of Poland, Halina Kwiatkowska acted in an underground theatre alongside a future pope? ... that the 1979 Salvadoran coup d'état overthrew President Carlos Humberto Romero? ... that in later life, Paul Mickelson bought the organ upon which he had made his first recording as a solo artist at NBC? ... that computer scientist Sheree Atcheson has been recognised by Computer Weekly as one of the "most influential women in UK tech"? ... that multimedia artist Suki Seokyeong Kang paints a gouache painting every day as part of her work? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 2John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 3James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 4Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 5Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 6Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Image 7A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 8Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Golda MeirPhoto credit: Marion S. Trikosko, U.S. News & World Report A portrait of Golda Meir from 1973, during her tenure as Prime Minister of Israel. She was the first (and, to date, only) female Prime Minister of Israel, and was the third female Prime Minister in the world, as well as one of the founders of the State of Israel. Born as Golda Mabovitz, she chose her Hebrew name "Meir" upon her appointment as Foreign Minister in 1956. As Prime Minister, Meir oversaw a tumultuous period in Israeli history, with the War of Attrition, Operation Wrath of God, and the Yom Kippur War, all happening during that time. More selected portraits Image 2 Stephen MerchantPhoto: Carolyn Djanogly Stephen Merchant (b. 1974) is an English writer, director, radio presenter, comedian, and actor. He is best known for his collaborations with Ricky Gervais, with whom he co-wrote and co-directed the popular British sitcom The Office, co-hosts The Ricky Gervais Show, and co-wrote, co-directed, and co-starred in Extras. More selected portraits Image 3 T206 Honus WagnerImage credit: American Tobacco Company The T206 Honus Wagner is a rare baseball card depicting Honus Wagner (February 24, 1874 – December 6, 1955), a dead-ball era shortstop considered one of the best players of all time. The card was designed and issued by the American Tobacco Company from 1909 to 1911. Only 50 to 200 cards were ever distributed to the public, and as a result of the card's rarity and popularity, prices have soared. In 2007, a collector paid $2.8 million for one, making it the most valuable baseball card in history. This specimen belongs to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in Cooperstown, New York. More selected portraits Image 4 Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount NelsonPainting: Lemuel Francis Abbott Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson, (1758–1805) was a British flag officer who served in the Royal Navy, particularly during the Napoleonic Wars. Born in Norfolk, Nelson entered the navy at age 13, and in 1778 he obtained his own command. During his career he suffered from seasickness, and by the time of the Trafalgar Campaign he had already lost his right arm and sight in an eye in battles in Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Corsica, respectively. In 1805 he took over the Cádiz blockade, and on 21 October of that year Nelson's fleet engaged the Franco-Spanish one at the Battle of Trafalgar. The battle was a British victory, but during the action Nelson was fatally wounded by a French sharpshooter. Numerous monuments, such as Nelson's Column, have been created in his memory, and his signal "England expects that every man will do his duty" has been widely quoted, paraphrased and referenced. More selected portraits Image 5 Francisco GoyaPainting: Vicente López y Portaña Francisco Goya (1746–1828) was a Spanish romantic painter and printmaker regarded as both the last of the Old Masters and the first of the moderns. Goya was a court painter to the Spanish Crown, and through his works was both a commentator on and chronicler of his era. This portrait was completed when Goya was 80 years old. More selected portraits Image 6 Lucy ArbellPhotograph credit: Nadar; restored by Adam Cuerden Lucy Arbell (8 June 1878 – 21 May 1947), was a French mezzo-soprano whose operatic career was largely centred in Paris. Her career was particularly associated with the composer Jules Massenet, who created a number of operatic roles for her before his death in 1912. This carte de visite of Arbell was created by the French photographer Nadar. More selected portraits Image 7 Peter LevyPhoto credit: John Byford Peter Levy (b. 1955) is a British television and radio presenter, currently host of the BBC regional news programme Look North, broadcast from Hull to East Yorkshire and Lincolnshire. He also hosts The Peter Levy Show on BBC Radio Humberside. Born in South West England, Levy moved to Yorkshire in his teens. After a stint in London as an actor, during which time he appeared on Man About the House, he returned to Yorkshire in 1975 to become a disc jockey before joining Look North in 1987. More selected portraits Image 8 Maxim GorkyPhoto: Herman Mishkin; Restoration: Fallschirmjäger Maxim Gorky (1868–1936) was a Russian political activist and writer who helped establish the Socialist Realism literary method. This portrait dates from a trip Gorky made to the United States in 1906, on which he raised funds for the Bolsheviks. During this trip he wrote his novel The Mother. More selected portraits Image 9 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 10 Edgar Allan PoeDaguerreotype credit: W.S. Hartshorn A daguerreotype of Edgar Allan Poe taken in 1848, less than a year before his death. Best known for his tales of the macabre and mystery, Poe was one of the early American practitioners of the short story and a progenitor of detective fiction and crime fiction. He is also credited with contributing to the emergent science fiction genre. A copyright statement is inscribed on this image because it is a photograph of the original daguerreotype. More selected portraits Image 11 Jeremy DoylePhoto: Sport the Library Jeremy Doyle (1983–2011) was an Australian wheelchair basketball player. Left paraplegic after a car accident, he was classified as a 1 point player. While representing his country Doyle won two gold medals, first at the 2009 Paralympic World Cup and again at the 2010 Wheelchair Basketball World Championship. More selected portraits Image 12 Al GreyPhotograph credit: William P. Gottlieb; restored by Adam Cuerden Al Grey (June 6, 1925 – March 24, 2000) was an American jazz trombonist who was known for his plunger-mute technique. After serving in World War II, he joined Benny Carter's band, then the bands of Jimmie Lunceford, Lucky Millinder, and Lionel Hampton. In the 1950s, he was a member of the big bands of Dizzy Gillespie and Count Basie before forming his own bands in the 1960s. This photograph by William P. Gottlieb shows Grey still performing into the 1980s. More selected portraits Image 13 Rory KennedyPhotograph credit: Lyndie Benson Rory Kennedy (born December 12, 1968) is an American documentary filmmaker and the youngest child of U.S. senator Robert Kennedy and Ethel Skakel. Born six months after the assassination of her father, her life has seen many tragedies. As a director and producer, she has made documentary films that center on social issues such as addiction, nuclear radiation, the treatment of prisoners of war, and the politics of the Mexican border fence. Her films have been featured on many TV networks, and her 2014 documentary Last Days in Vietnam was nominated for an Academy Award. More selected portraits Image 14 Frank SinatraPhoto: William P. Gottlieb American singer Frank Sinatra (1915–98) in 1947, at the Liederkrantz Hall in New York. Sinatra began his career in 1935, reaching unprecedented success after being signed by Columbia Records in 1943. After a lull in the late 1940s, his career regained new vigor in the 1950s. More selected portraits Image 15 Alice PaulPhotograph credit: Harris & Ewing; restored by Adam Cuerden Alice Paul was an American suffragist, feminist, and women's-rights activist, and one of the main leaders and strategists of the campaign for the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits sex discrimination in the right to vote. Along with Lucy Burns and others, she strategized events such as the Woman Suffrage Procession and the Silent Sentinels as part of the successful campaign that resulted in the amendment's passage on August 18, 1920. This photograph of Paul was taken in 1915 by the Harris & Ewing photographic studio in Washington, D.C. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 21 Births 1694 - Voltaire, French philosopher (d. 1778) (pictured) 1898 - René Magritte, Belgian painter (d. 1967) 1920 - Stan Musial, baseball player 1937 - Marlo Thomas, American actress 1945 - Goldie Hawn, American actress 1965 - Björk, Icelandic singer 1969 - Ken Griffey, Jr., baseball player Deaths 1652 - Jan Bro?ek, Polish mathematician, physician, and astronomer (b. 1585) 1695 - Henry Purcell, English composer 1958 - Mel Ott, baseball player (b. 1909) 1959 - Max Baer, American boxer (b. 1909) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) 16 November 2021 – The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) 15 November 2021 – China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) 10 November 2021 – Politics of Sweden Swedish Prime Minister Stefan Löfven resigns after seven years in office, although he will continue to remain in office ad interim until a new government is formed. Minister for Finance Magdalena Andersson, who succeeded Löfven as leader of the Social Democratic Party on November 4, is expected to become the first female prime minister in the country's history. (ABC News) 29 October 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Myanmar coup d'état U Win Htein, aide to the deposed Burmese leader Aung San Suu Kyi, is sentenced to 20 years in prison for sedition. Htein became the first politician arrested in the aftermath of the February 2021 coup to be convicted. (Deutsche Welle) Updated: 21:33, 20 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "I have but one passion: to enlighten those who have been kept in the dark, in the name of humanity which has suffered so much and is entitled to happiness. My fiery protest is simply the cry of my very soul." — Émile Zola In "J'accuse…!", L'Aurore 13 January 1898 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Powderfinger performing "These Days" on the Across the Great Divide tour, September 2007, Sydney. Powderfinger were an Australian rock band formed in Brisbane in 1989. From 1992 until their break-up in 2010, the line-up consisted of vocalist Bernard Fanning, guitarists Darren Middleton and Ian Haug, bass guitarist John Collins and drummer Jon Coghill. The group's third studio album Internationalist peaked at No. 1 on the ARIA Albums Chart in September 1998. They followed with four more number-one studio albums in a row: Odyssey Number Five (September 2000), Vulture Street (July 2003), Dream Days at the Hotel Existence (June 2007) and Golden Rule (November 2009). Their Top Ten hit singles are "My Happiness" (2000), "(Baby I've Got You) On My Mind" (2003) and "Lost and Running" (2007). Powderfinger earned a total of eighteen ARIA Awards, making them the second-most awarded band behind Silverchair. Ten Powderfinger albums and DVDs certified multiple-platinum, with Odyssey Number Five – their most successful album – achieving eightfold platinum certification for shipment of over 560,000 units. After the release of their first DVD, These Days: Live in Concert (September 2004), and the compilation album Fingerprints: The Best of Powderfinger, 1994–2000 (November 2004), the group announced a hiatus in 2005. The June 2007 announcement of a two-month-long nationwide tour with Silverchair, Across the Great Divide tour, followed the release of Dream Days at the Hotel Existence. Powderfinger were also involved in various philanthropic causes. In 2005, they performed at a WaveAid concert in Sydney, to help raise funds for areas affected by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. Another performance at the Sydney Opera House in October 2007 raised funds for breast cancer victims and their families. One aim of their Across the Great Divide Tour was to promote the efforts of Reconciliation Australia, and awareness of the gap in life expectancy between Indigenous and non-Indigenous children. In April 2010 Powderfinger announced that they would be breaking up after their Sunsets Farewell Tour, declaring it would be their last, as they had musically said everything they wanted to say. On 13 November 2010, they played their last concert, signifying their disbandment. In November the following year, rock music journalist Dino Scatena and Powderfinger published a biography, Footprints: the inside story of Australia's best loved band. (Full article...) Image 2 Olivia Mary Manning CBE (2 March 1908 – 23 July 1980) was a British novelist, poet, writer, and reviewer. Her fiction and non-fiction, frequently detailing journeys and personal odysseys, were principally set in the United Kingdom, Europe, and the Middle East. She often wrote from her personal experience, though her books also demonstrate strengths in imaginative writing. Her books are widely admired for her artistic eye and vivid descriptions of place. Manning's youth was divided between Portsmouth and Ireland, giving her what she described as "the usual Anglo-Irish sense of belonging nowhere". She attended art school and moved to London, where her first serious novel, The Wind Changes, was published in 1937. In August 1939 she married R. D. Smith ("Reggie"), a British Council lecturer posted in Bucharest, Romania, and subsequently lived in Greece, Egypt, and British Mandatory Palestine as the Nazis overran Eastern Europe. Her experiences formed the basis for her best-known work, the six novels making up The Balkan Trilogy and The Levant Trilogy, known collectively as Fortunes of War. Critics judged her overall output to be of uneven quality, but this series, published between 1960 and 1980, was described by Anthony Burgess as "the finest fictional record of the war produced by a British writer". (Full article...) Image 3 Albert Benjamin "Happy" Chandler Sr. (July 14, 1898 – June 15, 1991) was an American politician from Kentucky. He represented Kentucky in the U.S. Senate and served as its 44th and 49th governor. Aside from his political positions, he also served as the second Commissioner of Baseball from 1945 to 1951 and was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1982. His grandson, Ben Chandler, later served as congressman for Kentucky's Sixth District. A multi-sport athlete during his college days at Transylvania College, Chandler briefly considered a career in professional baseball before deciding to pursue a law degree. After graduation, he entered politics and was elected as a Democrat to the Kentucky Senate in 1928. Two years later, he was elected lieutenant governor, serving under Governor Ruby Laffoon. Chandler and Laffoon disagreed on the issue of instituting a state sales tax and when Chandler, the presiding officer in the state senate, worked to block the legislation, Laffoon's allies in the General Assembly stripped him of many of his statutory powers. The tax then passed by a narrow margin. Knowing that Laffoon would try to select his own successor at the Democratic nominating convention, Chandler waited until Laffoon left the state—leaving Chandler as acting governor—and called the legislature into session to enact a mandatory primary election bill. The bill passed, and in the ensuing primary, Chandler defeated Laffoon's choice, Thomas Rhea. He then went on to defeat Republican King Swope by the largest margin of victory for a Kentucky gubernatorial race at that time. As governor, Chandler oversaw the repeal of the sales tax, replacing the lost revenue with new excise taxes and the state's first income tax. He also enacted a major reorganization of state government, realizing significant savings for the state. He used these savings to pay off the state debt and improve the state's education and transportation systems. (Full article...) Image 4 Modern ruins of Ludlow Castle Pain fitzJohn (before 1100 – 10 July 1137) was an Anglo-Norman nobleman and administrator, one of King Henry I of England's "new men", who owed their positions and wealth to the king. Pain's family originated in Normandy, but there is little to suggest that he had many ties there, and he appears to have spent most of his career in England and the Welsh Marches. A son of a minor nobleman, he rose through ability to become an important royal official during Henry's reign. In 1115, he was rewarded with marriage to an heiress, thereby gaining control of the town of Ludlow and its castle, which he augmented with further acquisitions. (Full article...) Image 5 The FitzWalter coat of arms: d'or ung fece entre deux cheverons de goules ('Or, a fess gules between two chevrons of the last'). The arms are a differenced version of those of de Clare, the senior branch of the family. John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter (Fitzwalter or Fitz Wauter; c. 1315 – 18 October 1361) was a prominent Essex landowner best known for his criminal activities, particularly around Colchester. His family was of a noble and ancient lineage, with connections to the powerful de Clare family, who had arrived in England at the time of the Norman conquest of England. The FitzWalters held estates across Essex, as well as properties in London and Norfolk. John FitzWalter played a prominent role during the early years of King Edward III's wars in France, and at some point FitzWalter was married to Eleanor Percy, the daughter of Henry, Lord Percy. FitzWalter built a strong affinity around him, mainly from among leading members of the county's gentry, but also including men from elsewhere, such as a Norfolk parson. At their head, FitzWalter waged an armed campaign against the neighbouring town of Colchester, almost from the moment he reached adulthood. The townsmen seem to have exacerbated the dispute by illegally entering FitzWalter's park in Lexden; in return, FitzWalter banned them from one of their own watermills and then, in 1342, he besieged the town, preventing anyone entering or leaving for some weeks, as well as ransacking much property and destroying the market. One historian has described him, in his activities, as the medieval equivalent of a 20th-century American racketeer. Other victims of his Essex gang were local jurors, royal officials, a man forced to abjure the realm, and the prior of Little Dunmow Abbey. (Full article...) Image 6 Djajakusuma, 1950s Djadoeg Djajakusuma ([d?a?d?? d?ajaku?suma]; 1 August 1918 – 28 October 1987) was an Indonesian film director and promoter of traditional art forms. Born to a nobleman and his wife in Temanggung, Central Java, Djajakusuma became interested in the arts at a young age, choosing to pursue a career in theatre. During the Japanese occupation from 1943 to 1945 he was a translator and actor, and in the four-year national revolution which followed he worked for the military's educational division, several news agencies, and in drama. In 1951, Djajakusuma joined the National Film Corporation (Perfini) at the invitation of Usmar Ismail. After making his directorial debut with Embun, Djajakusuma released a further eleven films with the company before leaving in 1964. He then returned to traditional Indonesian theatre, including wayang. Although he continued to direct movies independently of Perfini, most of his energies were dedicated to promoting traditional art forms and teaching cinematography. After over a decade of poor health and high blood pressure, Djajakusuma collapsed during a ceremony and died. He was buried in Karet Bivak Cemetery. (Full article...) Image 7 Brewer with the Tampa Bay Lightning in 2011 Eric Peter Brewer (born April 17, 1979) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey defenceman who played sixteen seasons in the National Hockey League (NHL), last suiting up for the Toronto Maple Leafs. He is an NHL All-Star and Olympic gold medalist. He began his career as a distinguished junior ice hockey player, named to the Western Hockey League (WHL) West Second All-Star Team and the Western Conference roster for the 1998 WHL All-Star Game (although he missed the game due to injury). Drafted in the first round, fifth overall by the New York Islanders in the 1997 NHL Entry Draft, Brewer has spent parts of his sixteen-year NHL career with the Islanders, the Edmonton Oilers, the St. Louis Blues, Tampa Bay Lightning, Anaheim Ducks and Maple Leafs, and captained the Blues for two years. He has also suited up for the Prince George Cougars of the WHL and the Lowell Lock Monsters of the American Hockey League (AHL). In 1999, Brewer was selected for the Prince George Cougars' all-time team in a Canadian Hockey League promotion. (Full article...) Image 8 Khan at an event for Hyundai in 2018 Shah Rukh Khan (pronounced [???????x x??n]; born 2 November 1965), also known by the initialism SRK, is an Indian actor, film producer, and television personality who works in Hindi films. Referred to in the media as the "Baadshah of Bollywood" (in reference to his 1999 film Baadshah), "King of Bollywood" and "King Khan", he has appeared in more than 80 films, and earned numerous accolades, including 14 Filmfare Awards. The Government of India has awarded him the Padma Shri, and the Government of France has awarded him the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres and the Legion of Honour. Khan has a significant following in Asia and the Indian diaspora worldwide. In terms of audience size and income, he has been described as one of the most successful film stars in the world. Khan began his career with appearances in several television series in the late 1980s. He made his Bollywood debut in 1992 with Deewana. Early in his career, Khan was recognised for portraying villainous roles in the films Baazigar (1993), Darr (1993), and Anjaam (1994). He then rose to prominence after starring in a series of romantic films, including Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge (1995), Dil To Pagal Hai (1997), Kuch Kuch Hota Hai (1998), Mohabbatein (2000) and Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham... (2001). Khan went on to earn critical acclaim for his portrayal of an alcoholic in Devdas (2002), a NASA scientist in Swades (2004), a hockey coach in Chak De! India (2007) and a man with Asperger syndrome in My Name Is Khan (2010). His highest-grossing films include the comedies Chennai Express (2013), Happy New Year (2014), Dilwale (2015), and the crime film Raees (2017). Many of his films display themes of Indian national identity and connections with diaspora communities, or gender, racial, social and religious differences and grievances. (Full article...) Image 9 Jacobus Anthonie Meessen (Dutch pronunciation: [ja??ko?b?s ?n?to?ni ?me?s?(n)]; 5 December 1836 – 14 November 1885) was a Dutch photographer who took more than 250 portraits and landscapes of the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia) between 1864 and 1870. Born to a carpenter in Utrecht, Meessen worked in that trade in the Indies before marrying in the Netherlands in the early 1860s. He returned to the colony in 1864, intent on documenting its land and people. He worked mostly in the capital of Batavia (now Jakarta), Java, and Padang, Sumatra; he also photographed Bangka, Belitung, Borneo, and Nias. When Meessen returned to the Netherlands in 1870, he established a short-lived partnership with Abraham Vermeulen and began disseminating his photographs. Selected images were given to King William III in an elaborately decorated album in 1871, while more were published by De Bussy in 1875 and exhibited in Paris and Amsterdam. In his final years, Meessen worked predominantly as an architect. Collections of his albumen prints, some of which were hand-tinted or annotated, are held in four institutions in the Netherlands. (Full article...) Image 10 Engraving of Bonnet from A General History of the Pyrates (1724) Stede Bonnet (1688 – 10 December 1718) was an early eighteenth-century Barbadian pirate, sometimes called "The Gentleman Pirate" because he was a moderately wealthy land-owner before turning to a life of crime. Bonnet was born into a wealthy English family on the island of Barbados, and inherited the family estate after his father's death in 1694. In 1709, he married Mary Allamby, and engaged in some level of militia service. Because of marital problems, and despite his lack of sailing experience, Bonnet decided he should turn to piracy in the summer of 1717. He bought a sailing vessel, named it Revenge, and travelled with his paid crew along the Eastern Seaboard of what is now the United States, capturing other vessels and burning other Barbadian ships. Bonnet set sail for Nassau, Bahamas, to the haven for pirates known as the "pirates' republic", but he was seriously wounded en route during an encounter with a Spanish warship. After arriving in Nassau, Bonnet met Edward Teach, the infamous pirate Blackbeard. Incapable of leading his crew, Bonnet temporarily ceded his ship's command to Blackbeard. Before separating in December 1717, Blackbeard and Bonnet plundered and captured merchant ships along the East Coast. After Bonnet failed to capture the Protestant Caesar, his crew abandoned him to join Blackbeard aboard the Queen Anne's Revenge. Bonnet stayed on Blackbeard's ship as a guest, and did not command a crew again until summer 1718, when he was pardoned by North Carolina governor Charles Eden and received clearance to go privateering against Spanish shipping. Bonnet was tempted to resume his piracy, but did not want to lose his pardon, so he adopted the alias "Captain Thomas" and changed his ship's name to Royal James. He had returned to piracy by July 1718. (Full article...) Image 11 Josiah Willard Gibbs Josiah Willard Gibbs (/??bz/; February 11, 1839 – April 28, 1903) was an American scientist who made significant theoretical contributions to physics, chemistry, and mathematics. His work on the applications of thermodynamics was instrumental in transforming physical chemistry into a rigorous inductive science. Together with James Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann, he created statistical mechanics (a term that he coined), explaining the laws of thermodynamics as consequences of the statistical properties of ensembles of the possible states of a physical system composed of many particles. Gibbs also worked on the application of Maxwell's equations to problems in physical optics. As a mathematician, he invented modern vector calculus (independently of the British scientist Oliver Heaviside, who carried out similar work during the same period). In 1863, Yale awarded Gibbs the first American doctorate in engineering. After a three-year sojourn in Europe, Gibbs spent the rest of his career at Yale, where he was a professor of mathematical physics from 1871 until his death in 1903. Working in relative isolation, he became the earliest theoretical scientist in the United States to earn an international reputation and was praised by Albert Einstein as "the greatest mind in American history." In 1901, Gibbs received what was then considered the highest honor awarded by the international scientific community, the Copley Medal of the Royal Society of London, "for his contributions to mathematical physics." (Full article...) Image 12 Khalid Muhammad Abdallah al-Mihdhar (Arabic: ???? ????????, Kh?lid al-Mi???r; also transliterated as Almihdhar) (May 16, 1975 – September 11, 2001) was a Saudi Arabian hijacker. He was one of the five hijackers of American Airlines Flight 77, which was flown into the Pentagon as part of the September 11 attacks. Al-Mihdhar was born in Saudi Arabia and fought with the Bosnian mujahideen during the Bosnian War of the 1990s. In early 1999, he traveled to Afghanistan where, as an experienced and respected jihadist, he was selected by Osama bin Laden to participate in the attacks. Al-Mihdhar arrived in California with fellow hijacker Nawaf al-Hazmi in January 2000, after traveling to Malaysia for the Kuala Lumpur al-Qaeda Summit. At this point, the CIA was aware of al-Mihdhar, and he was photographed in Malaysia with another al-Qaeda member who was involved in the USS Cole bombing. The CIA did not inform the FBI when it learned that al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi had entered the United States, and al-Mihdhar was not placed on any watchlists until late August 2001. (Full article...) Image 13 Robert Roberts (15 June 1905 – 17 September 1974) was an English teacher, writer and social historian, noted for the evocative accounts of his working-class youth he gave in The Classic Slum (1971) and A Ragged Schooling (1976). Born and raised above his parents' corner shop in a deprived district of Salford, Roberts left school at 14 to undertake a seven-year apprenticeship as a brass finisher. Used as a form of cheap labour to carry out menial tasks, he was dismissed when the apprenticeship ended in 1926. Roberts inherited his mother's love of reading and socialist politics; while he spent the next three years unemployed, he attended evening classes to study foreign languages and social history. (Full article...) Image 14 Collins in 1969 Michael Collins (October 31, 1930 – April 28, 2021) was an American astronaut who flew the Apollo 11 command module Columbia around the Moon in 1969 while his crewmates, Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin, made the first crewed landing on the surface. He was also a test pilot and major general in the U.S. Air Force Reserves. Collins graduated from the United States Military Academy with the Class of 1952. He joined the United States Air Force, and flew F-86 Sabre fighters at Chambley-Bussières Air Base, France. He was accepted into the U.S. Air Force Experimental Flight Test Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base in 1960, also graduating from the Aerospace Research Pilot School (Class III). (Full article...) Image 15 Christopher George Latore Wallace (May 21, 1972 – March 9, 1997), better known by his stage names the Notorious B.I.G., Biggie Smalls, or simply Biggie, was an American rapper and songwriter. Rooted in the New York rap scene and gangsta rap traditions, he is widely considered one of the greatest rappers of all time. Wallace became known for his distinctive laidback lyrical delivery, offsetting the lyrics' often grim content. His music was often semi-autobiographical, telling of hardship and criminality, but also of debauchery and celebration. Born and raised in Brooklyn, New York City, Wallace signed to Sean "Puffy" Combs's label Bad Boy Records as it launched in 1993, and gained exposure through features on several other artists' singles that year. His debut album Ready to Die (1994) was met with widespread critical acclaim, and included his signature songs "Juicy" and "Big Poppa". The album made him the central figure in East Coast hip hop, and restored New York's visibility at a time when the West Coast hip hop scene was dominating hip hop music. Wallace was awarded the 1995 Billboard Music Awards' Rapper of the Year. The following year, he led his protégé group Junior M.A.F.I.A., a team of himself and longtime friends, including Lil' Kim, to chart success. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that GirlsDoPorn was one of the top 20 most viewed channels on Pornhub before its co-owners and a male pornographic actor were charged with sex trafficking by force, fraud, and coercion? ... that audio engineer Bill Hare has been called "the Dr. Dre of a cappella recording"? ... that Indonesian Communist Party leader Fachrul Baraqbah was an aristocrat of the Kutai Sultanate in East Kalimantan and a descendant of Muhammad? ... that Eugene C. Barker was involved in the "biggest bear fight" in Texas history with Governor James E. Ferguson, but Barker kept his job and Ferguson was later impeached? ... that abstract expressionist Jackson Pollock considered the greatest painting in North America to be a mural of Prometheus at Pomona College by Mexican artist José Clemente Orozco? ... that the My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic episode "Three's a Crowd" references Fear and Loathing writer Hunter S. Thompson? ... that author and performance artist Junauda Petrus originally wanted to be an astronaut, but is now a "pleasure activist"? ... that in The Age of Phillis (2020), American poet Honorée Fanonne Jeffers "fills in the gaps" in a white woman's biography of Phillis Wheatley (1753–1784)? ... that the writer of the hymn "Angel Voices, Ever Singing" banned it from being published with a tune composed by Arthur Sullivan? ... that the Lutheran theologian Maurus Gerner-Beuerle wrote an autobiographical work about tales and pranks from his childhood? ... that President Idi Amin ensured the Uganda Army's loyalty with the so-called "whisky run"? ... that Austrian engineer Ernst Lauda, who worked on preventing the Danube from flooding, was granted his own coat of arms (depicted)? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Image 2John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 3A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 4Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 5James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 6Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 7Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 8Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Ida B. WellsPhotograph: Mary Garrity; restoration: Adam Cuerden Ida B. Wells (1862–1931) was an African-American journalist, newspaper editor, suffragist, sociologist, and an early leader in the civil rights movement. Born into slavery in Holly Springs, Mississippi, Wells and her family were freed by the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863. Despite losing her parents to yellow fever when she was sixteen, Wells attended Fisk University and became a teacher. Politically active since her youth, she also became a writer on race issues and campaigned against lynching; in this latter capacity she published two influential pamphlets and traveled throughout the United States and the United Kingdom. Wells also helped establish the National Association of Colored Women and the National Afro-American Council. More selected portraits Image 2 Jeremy DoylePhoto: Sport the Library Jeremy Doyle (1983–2011) was an Australian wheelchair basketball player. Left paraplegic after a car accident, he was classified as a 1 point player. While representing his country Doyle won two gold medals, first at the 2009 Paralympic World Cup and again at the 2010 Wheelchair Basketball World Championship. More selected portraits Image 3 Raden SalehPainting: Friedrich Carl Albert Schreuel Raden Saleh (1811–1880) was a Romantic painter of Arab-Javanese ethnicity from the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia). Born in Semarang, in 1829 he was sent to the Netherlands to study portraiture and landscape painting under artists such as Cornelis Kruseman and Andreas Schelfhout. Upon returning to Java in 1851, Saleh focused predominantly on the day-to-day lives of the Javanese, although he also completed his magnum opus, The Arrest of Pangeran Diponegoro, in this period. This painting, though long thought to be a self-portrait, is now attributed to Friedrich Carl Albert Schreuel, a German artist whom Saleh knew during his time in Europe. More selected portraits Image 4 Portrait of Cardinal Niccolò AlbergatiArtwork credit: Jan van Eyck The Portrait of Cardinal Niccolò Albergati is an oil-on-oak-panel painting by the Early Netherlandish painter Jan van Eyck, dating to the 1430s. It is of considerable interest to art historians because van Eyck's preliminary drawing survives. The work depicts Niccolò Albergati, an Italian cardinal and a diplomat working under Pope Martin V, as a visibly ageing cleric, his face seamed with deep lines below the eyes; it is accompanied by notes on the colours to be used in the final painting. A comparison between this drawing and the portrait shows that van Eyck changed several details, such as the depth of the shoulders, the lower curve of the nose, the depth of the mouth and the size of the ear. The finished painting hangs at the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna, while the drawing is in the collection of the Staatliche Kunstsammlungen Dresden. More selected portraits Image 5 Javier SolanaPhoto credit: ? Dr. Javier Solana, the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the Secretary-General of both the Council of the European Union (EU) and the Western European Union (WEU). This photograph shows him as he is discussing with students of RWTH Aachen University, one day before receiving the International Charlemagne Prize of the city of Aachen. More selected portraits Image 6 Billy StrayhornPhotograph credit: William P. Gottlieb; restored by Adam Cuerden Billy Strayhorn (November 29, 1915 – May 31, 1967) was an American jazz composer, pianist, lyricist, and arranger, best remembered for his long-time collaboration with bandleader and composer Duke Ellington that lasted nearly three decades. Though classical music was Strayhorn's first love, his ambition to become a classical composer went unrealized because of the harsh reality of a black man trying to make his way in the world of classical music, which at that time was almost completely white. He was introduced to the music of pianists like Art Tatum and Teddy Wilson at age 19, and the artistic influence of these musicians guided him into the realm of jazz, where he remained for the rest of his life. This photograph of Strayhorn was taken by William P. Gottlieb in the 1940s. More selected portraits Image 7 Walt WhitmanPhotograph: George C. Cox; restoration: Adam Cuerden Walt Whitman (1819–1892) was an American poet, essayist and journalist. A humanist, he was a part of the transition between transcendentalism and realism, incorporating both views in his works. Whitman is among the most influential poets in the American canon, often called the father of free verse. His work was very controversial in its time, particularly his poetry collection Leaves of Grass (first published in 1855, but continuously revised until Whitman's death), which was described as obscene for its overt sexuality. More selected portraits Image 8 Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount NelsonPainting: Lemuel Francis Abbott Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson, (1758–1805) was a British flag officer who served in the Royal Navy, particularly during the Napoleonic Wars. Born in Norfolk, Nelson entered the navy at age 13, and in 1778 he obtained his own command. During his career he suffered from seasickness, and by the time of the Trafalgar Campaign he had already lost his right arm and sight in an eye in battles in Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Corsica, respectively. In 1805 he took over the Cádiz blockade, and on 21 October of that year Nelson's fleet engaged the Franco-Spanish one at the Battle of Trafalgar. The battle was a British victory, but during the action Nelson was fatally wounded by a French sharpshooter. Numerous monuments, such as Nelson's Column, have been created in his memory, and his signal "England expects that every man will do his duty" has been widely quoted, paraphrased and referenced. More selected portraits Image 9 Stephen MerchantPhoto: Carolyn Djanogly Stephen Merchant (b. 1974) is an English writer, director, radio presenter, comedian, and actor. He is best known for his collaborations with Ricky Gervais, with whom he co-wrote and co-directed the popular British sitcom The Office, co-hosts The Ricky Gervais Show, and co-wrote, co-directed, and co-starred in Extras. More selected portraits Image 10 John Henry NewmanPainting: John Everett Millais John Henry Newman (1801–90) was a British cleric and leader in the Oxford Movement, a group of Anglicans who wished to return the Church of England to many Catholic beliefs and forms of worship traditional in the medieval times. In 1845 Newman converted to Catholicism, eventually rising to cardinal. More selected portraits Image 11 Alice ManfieldPhoto: Unknown; Restoration: John O'Neill Alice Manfield (1878–1960), commonly known as Guide Alice, was a mountain guide, amateur naturalist, chalet owner, photographer, and early feminist figure from Victoria, Australia. Her pioneering work at Mount Buffalo from the 1890s to the 1930s led to her becoming a tourist attraction in her own right, and helped lead to the establishment of the Mount Buffalo National Park. Manfield's parents ran a hotel at Mount Buffalo, and she led tours up the mountain from her youth. Because of her enthusiasm and extensive knowledge of the area, she quickly became a highly sought-after guide. She continued guiding tourists until the 1930s. More selected portraits Image 12 Malcolm XPhoto credit: Ed Ford, New York World-Telegram and Sun Malcolm X was an American Black Muslim minister and a spokesman for the Nation of Islam. Born Malcolm Little, he changed his surname to "X" as a rejection of his "slave name". Tensions between him and the Nation of Islam caused him to break from the group in 1964. He claimed to have received daily death threats and his house was burned to the ground in February 1965. One week later, Malcolm X was assassinated, having been shot in the chest by a sawed-off shotgun and 16 times with handguns. Three members of the Nation of Islam were convicted. More selected portraits Image 13 Dilma RousseffPhoto: Agência Brasil Dilma Rousseff is the 36th and current President of Brazil, in office since 1 January 2011. She is the first woman to hold the office. Previously she was Chief of Staff to the President of Brazil, serving under President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, from 2005 to 2010. The daughter of a Bulgarian entrepreneur, she is an economist by training and co-founder of the Democratic Labour Party. She served as Da Silva's Minister of Energy and became Chief of Staff after José Dirceu's resignation amidst scandal. She was elected the presidency in a run-off election on 31 October 2010. More selected portraits Image 14 Vincent van GoghPainting credit: John Russell Vincent van Gogh is an oil-on-canvas portrait by Australian painter John Russell, dated 1886. It depicts Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, who became lifelong friends with Russell after meeting him at Fernand Cormon's atelier in Paris, which they both attended. Painted in a realist and academic manner, the portrait shows hints of the impressionist techniques with which they began experimenting in the latter half of the 1880s. It is the earliest of three portraits painted of Van Gogh by his contemporaries, the other two being Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887) and Paul Gauguin's The Painter of Sunflowers (1888). Van Gogh seems to have been particularly attached to Russell's portrait, which Russell gifted to him as a mark of their friendship. The painting passed from Van Gogh to his brother Theo and then to their family; it is now in the collection of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. More selected portraits Image 15 Thomas CranmerPainting: Gerlach Flicke Thomas Cranmer (1489–1556, depicted in 1545) was a leader of the English Reformation and Archbishop of Canterbury during the reigns of three monarchs. Ascending to power during the reign of Henry VIII, under Edward VI he was able to promote a series of reforms in the Church of England. He was executed for treason under Mary I. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 21 Births 1694 - Voltaire, French philosopher (d. 1778) (pictured) 1898 - René Magritte, Belgian painter (d. 1967) 1920 - Stan Musial, baseball player 1937 - Marlo Thomas, American actress 1945 - Goldie Hawn, American actress 1965 - Björk, Icelandic singer 1969 - Ken Griffey, Jr., baseball player Deaths 1652 - Jan Bro?ek, Polish mathematician, physician, and astronomer (b. 1585) 1695 - Henry Purcell, English composer 1958 - Mel Ott, baseball player (b. 1909) 1959 - Max Baer, American boxer (b. 1909) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) 16 November 2021 – The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) 15 November 2021 – China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) 10 November 2021 – Politics of Sweden Swedish Prime Minister Stefan Löfven resigns after seven years in office, although he will continue to remain in office ad interim until a new government is formed. Minister for Finance Magdalena Andersson, who succeeded Löfven as leader of the Social Democratic Party on November 4, is expected to become the first female prime minister in the country's history. (ABC News) 29 October 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Myanmar coup d'état U Win Htein, aide to the deposed Burmese leader Aung San Suu Kyi, is sentenced to 20 years in prison for sedition. Htein became the first politician arrested in the aftermath of the February 2021 coup to be convicted. (Deutsche Welle) Updated: 21:33, 21 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "I have but one passion: to enlighten those who have been kept in the dark, in the name of humanity which has suffered so much and is entitled to happiness. My fiery protest is simply the cry of my very soul." — Émile Zola In "J'accuse…!", L'Aurore 13 January 1898 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Autobiography A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Davies in 2008 Stephen Russell Davies OBE (born 27 April 1963), better known as Russell T Davies, is a Welsh screenwriter and television producer whose works include Queer as Folk, The Second Coming, Casanova, the 2005 revival of the BBC One science fiction franchise Doctor Who, Cucumber, Years and Years and It's a Sin. Born in Swansea, Davies had aspirations as a comic artist before focusing on being a playwright and screenwriter. After graduating from Oxford University, he joined the BBC's children's department, CBBC, in 1985 on a part-time basis and held various positions, which included creating two series, Dark Season and Century Falls. He eventually left the BBC for Granada Television, and in 1994 began writing adult television drama. His early scripts generally explored concepts of religion and sexuality among various backdrops: Revelations was a soap opera about organised religion and featured a lesbian vicar; Springhill was a soap drama about a Catholic family in contemporary Liverpool; The Grand explored society's opinion of subjects such as prostitution, abortion and homosexuality during the interwar period; and Queer as Folk recreated his experiences in the Manchester gay scene. His work in the 2000s included Bob & Rose, which portrayed a gay man who fell in love with a woman; The Second Coming, which focused on the second coming and deicide of Jesus Christ from a mostly non-religious point of view; Mine All Mine, a comedy about a family who discover they own the entire city of Swansea; and Casanova, an adaptation of the complete memoirs of Venetian adventurer Giacomo Casanova. (Full article...) Image 2 Armorial of Plantagenet The House of Plantagenet (/plæn?tæd??n?t/) was a royal house which originated from the lands of Anjou in France. The family held the English throne from 1154 (with the accession of Henry II, at the end of The Anarchy crisis) to 1485, when Richard III died in battle. Under the Plantagenets, England was transformed. The Plantagenet kings were often forced to negotiate compromises such as Magna Carta, which had served to constrain their royal power in return for financial and military support. The king was no longer considered an absolute monarch in the nation—holding the prerogatives of judgement, feudal tribute, and warfare—but now also had defined duties to the kingdom, underpinned by a sophisticated justice system. A distinct national identity was shaped by their conflict with the French, Scots, Welsh and Irish, and the establishment of the English language as the primary language. (Full article...) Image 3 The Sex Pistols in Amsterdam in 1977 (L–R: Cook, Matlock, Rotten and Jones) The Sex Pistols were an English punk rock band that formed in London in 1975. Although their initial career lasted just two and a half years, they are regarded as one of the most groundbreaking acts in the history of popular music. They were responsible for initiating the punk movement in the United Kingdom and inspiring many later punk and alternative rock musicians. Their fashion and hairstyles have been credited as a significant influence on punk image, and they are often associated with anarchism within music. The Sex Pistols originally comprised vocalist John Lydon (known at the time by his stage name "Johnny Rotten"), guitarist Steve Jones, drummer Paul Cook and bassist Glen Matlock. Matlock was replaced by Sid Vicious in early 1977. Under the management of Malcolm McLaren, the band attracted controversies that both captivated and appalled Britain. Through an obscenity-laced television interview in December 1976 and their May 1977 single "God Save the Queen", attacking Britons' social conformity and deference to the Crown, they popularised punk rock in the UK. It was banned not only by the BBC but also by nearly every independent radio station, making it the "most heavily censored record in British history". (Full article...) Image 4 Iginla with the Calgary Flames in 2008 Jarome Arthur-Leigh Adekunle Tig Junior Elvis Iginla (/d???ro?m ????nl?/; born July 1, 1977) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey winger. He played over 1500 games in the National Hockey League (NHL) for the Calgary Flames, Pittsburgh Penguins, Boston Bruins, Colorado Avalanche and Los Angeles Kings. As a junior, Iginla was a member of two Memorial Cup winning teams with the Kamloops Blazers and was named the Western Hockey League (WHL) Player of the Year in 1996. He was selected 11th overall by the Dallas Stars in the 1995 NHL Entry Draft, but was traded to Calgary prior to making his NHL debut. Nicknamed "Iggy", he led the NHL in goals and points in 2001–02, and won the Lester B. Pearson Award as its most valuable player as voted by the players. In 2003–04, Iginla led the league in goals for the second time and captained the Flames to the Stanley Cup Finals, leading the playoffs in goals. (Full article...) Image 5 Gielgud as Benedick in Much Ado About Nothing, 1959 Sir Arthur John Gielgud, OM, CH (/??i?l??d/; 14 April 1904 – 21 May 2000) was an English actor and theatre director whose career spanned eight decades. With Ralph Richardson and Laurence Olivier, he was one of the trinity of actors who dominated the British stage for much of the 20th century. A member of the Terry family theatrical dynasty, he gained his first paid acting work as a junior member of his cousin Phyllis Neilson-Terry's company in 1922. After studying at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art he worked in repertory theatre and in the West End before establishing himself at the Old Vic as an exponent of Shakespeare in 1929–31. During the 1930s Gielgud was a stage star in the West End and on Broadway, appearing in new works and classics. He began a parallel career as a director, and set up his own company at the Queen's Theatre, London. He was regarded by many as the finest Hamlet of his era, and was also known for high comedy roles such as John Worthing in The Importance of Being Earnest. In the 1950s Gielgud feared that his career was threatened when he was convicted and fined for a homosexual offence, but his colleagues and the public supported him loyally. When avant-garde plays began to supersede traditional West End productions in the later 1950s he found no new suitable stage roles, and for several years he was best known in the theatre for his one-man Shakespeare show Ages of Man. From the late 1960s he found new plays that suited him, by authors including Alan Bennett, David Storey and Harold Pinter. (Full article...) Image 6 André Messager, 1921 André Charles Prosper Messager (French: [m?sa?e]; 30 December 1853 – 24 February 1929) was a French composer, organist, pianist and conductor. His compositions include eight ballets and thirty opéras comiques, opérettes and other stage works, among which his ballet Les Deux Pigeons (1886) and opéra comique Véronique (1898) have had lasting success; Les P'tites Michu (1897) and Monsieur Beaucaire (1919) were also popular internationally. Messager took up the piano as a small child and later studied composition with, among others, Camille Saint-Saëns and Gabriel Fauré. He became a major figure in the musical life of Paris and later London, both as a conductor and a composer. Many of his Parisian works were also produced in the West End and some on Broadway; the most successful had long runs and numerous international revivals. He wrote two operatic works in English, and his later output included musical comedies for Sacha Guitry and Yvonne Printemps. (Full article...) Image 7 Portrait by Martin Archer Shee, 1833 William IV (William Henry; 21 August 1765 – 20 June 1837) was King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and King of Hanover from 26 June 1830 until his death in 1837. The third son of George III, William succeeded his elder brother George IV, becoming the last king and penultimate monarch of Britain's House of Hanover. William served in the Royal Navy in his youth, spending time in North America and the Caribbean, and was later nicknamed the "Sailor King". In 1789, he was created Duke of Clarence and St Andrews. In 1827, he was appointed as Britain's first Lord High Admiral since 1709. As his two older brothers died without leaving legitimate issue, he inherited the throne when he was 64 years old. His reign saw several reforms: the poor law was updated, child labour restricted, slavery abolished in nearly all of the British Empire, and the British electoral system refashioned by the Reform Act 1832. Although William did not engage in politics as much as his brother or his father, he was the last British monarch to appoint a prime minister contrary to the will of Parliament. He granted his German kingdom a short-lived liberal constitution. (Full article...) Image 8 Speer in 1933 Berthold Konrad Hermann Albert Speer (/?p??r/; German: [??pe???] (listen); 19 March 1905 – 1 September 1981) was a German architect who served as the Minister of Armaments and War Production in Nazi Germany during most of World War II. A close ally of Adolf Hitler, he was convicted at the Nuremberg trials and sentenced to 20 years in prison. An architect by training, Speer joined the Nazi Party in 1931. His architectural skills made him increasingly prominent within the Party, and he became a member of Hitler's inner circle. Hitler commissioned him to design and construct structures including the Reich Chancellery and the Nazi party rally grounds in Nuremberg. In 1937, Hitler appointed Speer as General Building Inspector for Berlin. In this capacity he was responsible for the Central Department for Resettlement that evicted Jewish tenants from their homes in Berlin. In February 1942, Speer was appointed as Reich Minister of Armaments and War Production. Using misleading statistics, he promoted himself as having performed an "armaments miracle" that was widely credited with keeping Germany in the war. In 1944, Speer established a task force to increase production of fighter aircraft. It became instrumental in the exploitation of slave labor for the benefit of the German war effort. (Full article...) Image 9 Hašek with the Detroit Red Wings in 2008 Dominik Hašek (Czech pronunciation: [?dom?n?k ??a??k], audio; born January 29, 1965) is a Czech former ice hockey goaltender. Widely regarded as one of the best goaltenders of all time, Hasek played for the Chicago Blackhawks, Buffalo Sabres, Detroit Red Wings and the Ottawa Senators in his 16-season National Hockey League career. During his years in Buffalo, he became one of the league's finest goaltenders, earning him the nickname "The Dominator". His strong play has been credited with establishing European goaltenders in a league previously dominated by North Americans. He is a two-time Stanley Cup champion, both with the Red Wings. Hašek was one of the league's most successful goaltenders of the 1990s and early 2000s. From 1993 to 2001, he won six Vezina Trophies, the most under the award's current system of voting for the best individual goalie. In 1998 he won his second consecutive Hart Memorial Trophy, becoming the first goaltender to win the award multiple times. During the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan, he led the Czech national ice hockey team to its first and only Olympic gold medal. The feat made him a popular figure in his home country and prompted hockey legend Wayne Gretzky to call him "the best player in the game". While with the Red Wings in 2002, Hašek became the first European-trained starting goaltender to win the Stanley Cup. In the process, he set a record for shutouts in a postseason year. (Full article...) Image 10 Herbert W. Greenfield (November 25, 1869 – August 23, 1949) was a Canadian politician who served as the fourth premier of Alberta from 1921 until 1925. Born in Winchester, Hampshire, in England, he immigrated to Canada in his late twenties, settling first in Ontario and then in Alberta, where he farmed. He soon became involved in the United Farmers of Alberta (UFA), a farmers' lobby organization that was in the process of becoming a political party, and was elected as the organization's vice president. Greenfield did not run in the 1921 provincial election, the first provincial general election in which the UFA fielded candidates, but when the UFA won a majority in the Legislature in that election he was chosen by the UFA caucus to serve as Premier. Like most of the UFA caucus, Greenfield had no experience in government and he struggled in the position. He relied extensively on his Attorney General, John E. Brownlee, for counsel on policy and strategy. He was unable to control his caucus, which did not generally believe in party discipline, and his government almost lost several votes in the Legislature despite its majority. He was unable to effectively address the problems facing farmers (including drought and low grain prices), bitter labour disputes in the coal industry, or the pronounced divisions in public opinion that had sprung up around prohibition (which his government ended). Despite this, his time as Premier saw the elimination of the provincial deficit, substantial progress in negotiating the transfer of natural resource rights from the federal government, and the creation of the Alberta Wheat Pool. He also named Irene Parlby as the province's first female cabinet minister. (Full article...) Image 11 Gold dinar minted in Aleppo in the name of Salih ibn Mirdas and recognizing the suzerainty of Fatimid caliph az-Zahir, 1028/29 CE Abu Ali Salih ibn Mirdas (Arabic: ??? ??? ???? ?? ??????, romanized: Ab? ?Al? ??li? ibn Mird?s), also known by his laqab (honorific epithet) Asad al-Dawla ("Lion of the State"), was the founder of the Mirdasid dynasty and emir of Aleppo from 1025 until his death in May 1029. At its peak, his emirate (principality) encompassed much of the western Jazira (Upper Mesopotamia), northern Syria and several central Syrian towns. With occasional interruption, Salih's descendants ruled Aleppo for the next five decades. Salih launched his career in 1008, when he seized the Euphrates river fortress of al-Rahba. In 1012, he was imprisoned and tortured by the emir of Aleppo, Mansur ibn Lu'lu'. Two years later he escaped, capturing Mansur in battle and releasing him for numerous concessions, including half of Aleppo's revenues. This cemented Salih as the paramount emir of his tribe, the Banu Kilab, many of whose chieftains had died in Mansur's dungeons. With his Bedouin warriors, Salih captured a string of fortresses along the Euphrates, including Manbij and Raqqa, by 1022. He later formed an alliance with the Banu Kalb and Banu Tayy tribes and supported their struggle against the Fatimids of Egypt. During this tribal rebellion, Salih annexed the central Syrian towns of Homs, Baalbek and Sidon, before conquering Fatimid-held Aleppo in 1025, bringing "to success the plan which guided his [Banu Kilab] forebears for a century", according to historian Thierry Bianquis. (Full article...) Image 12 Bradley Joseph (born 1965) is an American composer, arranger, and producer of contemporary instrumental music. His compositions include works for orchestra, quartet, and solo piano, while his musical style ranges from "quietly pensive mood music to a rich orchestration of classical depth and breadth". Active since 1983, Joseph has performed in front of millions of people around the world. He played various instruments in rock bands throughout the Midwest until 1989 when Greek composer Yanni hired him for his core band after hearing a tape of his original compositions. He was a featured concert keyboardist with Yanni through six major tours, most recently in 2003 for the 60-city Ethnicity tour. He appears in the multi-platinum album and concert film, Live at the Acropolis. Joseph also spent five years as musical director and lead keyboardist for Sheena Easton, including a 1995 performance on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno. (Full article...) Image 13 Willard Mitt Romney (born March 12, 1947) is an American politician and businessman serving as the junior United States senator from Utah since January 2019, succeeding Orrin Hatch. He served as the 70th governor of Massachusetts from 2003 to 2007 and was the Republican Party's nominee for president of the United States in the 2012 election, losing to the incumbent president, Barack Obama. Raised in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan by George and Lenore Romney, he spent over two years in France as a Mormon missionary. He married Ann Davies in 1969; they have five sons. Active in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) throughout his adult life, Romney served as bishop of his ward and later as a stake president for an area covering Boston and many of its suburbs. By 1971, he had participated in the political campaigns of both his parents. In 1971 Romney graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in English from Brigham Young University (BYU) and in 1975 he received a JD–MBA degree from Harvard. He became a management consultant and in 1977 joined Bain & Company in Boston. As Bain's chief executive officer (CEO), he helped lead the company out of a financial crisis. In 1984, he co-founded and led the spin-off company Bain Capital, a private equity investment firm that became one of the largest of its kind in the nation. (Full article...) Image 14 Hartman in character as Chick Hazard, Private Eye, c.?1978 Philip Edward Hartman (né Hartmann; September 24, 1948 – May 28, 1998) was a Canadian-American actor, comedian, screenwriter, and graphic designer. After graduating from California State University, Northridge with a degree in graphic arts, he designed album covers for bands including Poco and America. In 1975, Hartman joined the comedy group The Groundlings, where he helped Paul Reubens develop his character, Pee-wee Herman. Hartman co-wrote the film Pee-wee's Big Adventure and made recurring appearances as Captain Carl on Reubens's show Pee-wee's Playhouse. In 1986, Hartman joined the NBC sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live (SNL) as a cast member, and stayed for eight seasons until 1994. Nicknamed "Glue" for his ability to hold the show together and help other cast members, he won a Primetime Emmy Award for his SNL work in 1989. In 1995, he later starred as Bill McNeal in the sitcom NewsRadio after declining to return to SNL. He also voiced various characters on The Simpsons, and had minor roles in the films Houseguest, Sgt. Bilko, Jingle All the Way, and Small Soldiers. (Full article...) Image 15 Barbera in 1993 Joseph "Joe" Roland Barbera (/b??r?b??r?, ?b??rb?r?/ bar-BAIR-?, BAR-b?r-?; Italian: [bar?b??ra]; March 24, 1911 – December 18, 2006) was an American animator, director, producer, storyboard artist, and cartoon artist, who co-founded the animation studio and production company Hanna-Barbera. Born to Italian immigrants in New York City, Barbera joined Van Beuren Studios in 1927 and subsequently Terrytoons in 1929. In 1937, he moved to California and while working at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM), Barbera met William Hanna. The two men began a collaboration that was at first best known for producing Tom and Jerry. In 1957, after MGM dissolved their animation department, they co-founded Hanna-Barbera, which became the most successful television animation studio in the business, producing programs such as The Flintstones, Yogi Bear, Scooby-Doo, Top Cat, The Smurfs, Huckleberry Hound, and The Jetsons. In 1967, Hanna-Barbera was sold to Taft Broadcasting for $12 million, but Hanna and Barbera remained heads of the company. In 1991, the studio was sold to Turner Broadcasting System, which in turn was merged with Time Warner, owners of Warner Bros., in 1996; Hanna and Barbera stayed on as advisors. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Fred Thomas has been described as "the greatest Canadian athlete you've never heard of"? ... that actor Erik Knudsen worked with Kevin Drew from Broken Social Scene, his favorite band, in a fictional band based on them for the soundtrack of Scott Pilgrim vs. the World? ... that a business-firm party is a political party created and run by one person to further their own interests? ... that the biographies Uncertainty and Beyond Uncertainty show, contrary to popular belief, that there is no evidence that Werner Heisenberg impeded the German nuclear weapons program to prevent Hitler from obtaining a bomb? ... that Swedish writer Annie Åkerhielm was an active campaigner against women's suffrage and democracy? ... that a line from the 1899 poem "Sympathy" provided the title for Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings? ... that Samuel Pepys wrote of Royal Navy Commissioner Sir Thomas Hervey: "a coxcombe he is and will never be better in the business of the Navy"? ... that plant scientist Norman C. Deno's research on seed germination techniques resulted in him writing a book with germination methods for thousands of species? ... that Pope Pius VI named Leonard Neale the coadjutor bishop of Baltimore in 1795, but Neale did not learn of this until 1800? ... that New Zealand writer Jessie Weston wrote for William Ernest Henley's magazine for 18 months without him knowing she was a woman? ... that Javier Bardem is the first Spanish actor to win an Academy Award, which he won for his performance in No Country for Old Men? ... that President Ulysses S. Grant planned but failed to annex the Dominican Republic from his summer cottage? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 2Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Image 3Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 4James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 5A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 6Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 7Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 8John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Frederick DouglassPhoto credit: George K. Warren American abolitionist, editor, orator, author, statesman and reformer Frederick Douglass, shown here in 1879. Born a slave, Douglass was one of the most prominent figures in African American history and a formidable public presence. He was a firm believer in the equality of all people, whether black, female, American Indian, or recent immigrant. He was fond of saying, "I would unite with anybody to do right and with nobody to do wrong." February is Black History Month in the United States and Canada. More selected portraits Image 2 Salman KhurshidPhoto: Muhammad Mahdi Karim Salman Khurshid is an Indian politician from the Indian National Congress. He serves as the Cabinet Minister of the Ministry of External Affairs. Previously Khurshid served as Minister of Law and Justice. More selected portraits Image 3 Ida B. WellsPhotograph: Mary Garrity; restoration: Adam Cuerden Ida B. Wells (1862–1931) was an African-American journalist, newspaper editor, suffragist, sociologist, and an early leader in the civil rights movement. Born into slavery in Holly Springs, Mississippi, Wells and her family were freed by the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863. Despite losing her parents to yellow fever when she was sixteen, Wells attended Fisk University and became a teacher. Politically active since her youth, she also became a writer on race issues and campaigned against lynching; in this latter capacity she published two influential pamphlets and traveled throughout the United States and the United Kingdom. Wells also helped establish the National Association of Colored Women and the National Afro-American Council. More selected portraits Image 4 Theodore Roosevelt and John MuirPhoto credit: Underwood and Underwood U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt (left) and nature preservationist John Muir, founder of the Sierra Club, stand together on Glacier Point in Yosemite National Park. In the background can be seen Upper and Lower Yosemite Falls. During this trip in 1903, Muir convinced Roosevelt to add Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove to the park, which had been established in 1890. More selected portraits Image 5 Lillian GishPhoto credit: Bain News Service A portrait of Lillian Gish from 1921. Gish was one of the first female movie stars, called "The First Lady of the Silent Screen", starting in 1912 and continuing to appear in films until 1987. The American Film Institute named Gish 17th among the greatest female stars of all time and awarded her a Life Achievement Award, making her the only recipient who was a major figure in the silent era. Remarkably, she never won an Academy Award for her work, although she did receive a Special Academy Award in 1971. More selected portraits Image 6 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. More selected portraits Image 7 Beppe GrilloPhotograph: Niccolò Caranti Beppe Grillo (b. 1948) is an Italian comedian, actor, blogger and political activist who established the Five Star Movement in 2009. Born in Genoa, Grillo became well known as a comic through several television shows in the 1980s, but following jokes which attacked the corruption of the Italian Socialist Party and its leader Bettino Craxi he was banned from television. Grillo continued to tour as a comedian while speaking out against corruption and banking scandals, and in 2005 Time named him a European hero. More selected portraits Image 8 Mark RuttePhoto: Nick van Ormondt Mark Rutte is (as of 2011) the incumbent Prime Minister of the Netherlands. He has been the leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) party since 2006. In the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in their occupying 31 of the 150 seats in the House of Representatives. When he was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal Prime Minister in the Netherlands in 92 years. More selected portraits Image 9 Francisco GoyaPainting: Vicente López y Portaña Francisco Goya (1746–1828) was a Spanish romantic painter and printmaker regarded as both the last of the Old Masters and the first of the moderns. Goya was a court painter to the Spanish Crown, and through his works was both a commentator on and chronicler of his era. This portrait was completed when Goya was 80 years old. More selected portraits Image 10 Brian NankervisPhoto: John O'Neill; edit: JJ Harrison Brian Nankervis (b. 1956), an Australian comedian and writer, shown here during a live performance. Nankervis rose to popularity while playing Raymond J. Bartholomeuz on Hey Hey It's Saturday; since 2005 he has been a host of the gameshow RocKwiz. More selected portraits Image 11 Buster KeatonPhoto credit: Bain News Service Along with Charlie Chaplin and Harold Lloyd, Buster Keaton was one of the most important comic actors of the silent era. His trademark was physical comedy with a stoic, deadpan expression on his face, earning him the nickname "The Great Stone Face". He appeared in dozens of films, and his The General was voted the fifteenth-best film of all time by Sight & Sound readers. Entertainment Weekly also named him the seventh-greatest film director in history. More selected portraits Image 12 Fridtjof NansenPhoto: Henry Van der Weyde; Restoration: Smalljim/PLW Fridtjof Nansen (1861–1930) was a Norwegian explorer, scientist, diplomat, humanitarian and Nobel Peace Prize laureate. He led the team that made the first crossing of the Greenland interior in 1888, and won international fame after reaching a record northern latitude of 86°14? during his North Pole expedition of 1893–96. Although he retired from exploration after his return to Norway, his techniques of polar travel and his innovations in equipment and clothing influenced a generation of subsequent Arctic and Antarctic expeditions. In 1922 he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his work on behalf of the displaced victims of the First World War and related conflicts. More selected portraits Image 13 Peter Oliver (painter)Portrait: Peter Oliver An 8.8-centimetre (3.5 in) tall self-portrait of the English miniaturist Peter Oliver (1594–1648). He often worked with watercolours. More selected portraits Image 14 Frédéric ChopinPhoto credit: Louis-Auguste Bisson The only known photograph of Frédéric Chopin, often incorrectly described as a daguerreotype. It is believed to have been taken in 1849 during the degenerative stages of his tuberculosis, shortly before his death. Chopin, a Polish pianist and composer of the Romantic era, is widely regarded as one of the most famous, influential, admired and prolific composers for the piano. He moved to Paris at the age of twenty, adopting the French variant of his name, "Frédéric-François", by which he is now known. More selected portraits Image 15 Lucy ArbellPhotograph credit: Nadar; restored by Adam Cuerden Lucy Arbell (8 June 1878 – 21 May 1947), was a French mezzo-soprano whose operatic career was largely centred in Paris. Her career was particularly associated with the composer Jules Massenet, who created a number of operatic roles for her before his death in 1912. This carte de visite of Arbell was created by the French photographer Nadar. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 23 Births 1616 - John Wallis, English mathematician (d. 1703) (pictured) 1804 - Franklin Pierce, 14th President of the United States (d. 1869) 1837 - Johannes Diderik van der Waals, Dutch physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1923) 1887 - Boris Karloff, British actor (d. 1969) 1888 - Harpo Marx, American comedian (d. 1964) Deaths 1814 - Elbridge Gerry, Vice President of the United States of America (b. 1744) 1902 - Walter Reed, American bacteriologist (b. 1851) 1979 - Merle Oberon, British actress (b. 1911) 1990 - Roald Dahl, British author (b. 1916) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 22 November 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections, losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) 21 November 2021 – 2021 Chilean general election Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) 16 November 2021 – The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) 15 November 2021 – China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) Updated: 21:33, 22 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "Not one of us knows what effect his life produces, and what he gives to others; that is hidden from us and must remain so, though we are often allowed to see some little fraction of it, so that we may not lose courage." — Albert Schweitzer In The Spiritual Life, 1947 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Autobiography A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Davies in 2008 Stephen Russell Davies OBE (born 27 April 1963), better known as Russell T Davies, is a Welsh screenwriter and television producer whose works include Queer as Folk, The Second Coming, Casanova, the 2005 revival of the BBC One science fiction franchise Doctor Who, Cucumber, Years and Years and It's a Sin. Born in Swansea, Davies had aspirations as a comic artist before focusing on being a playwright and screenwriter. After graduating from Oxford University, he joined the BBC's children's department, CBBC, in 1985 on a part-time basis and held various positions, which included creating two series, Dark Season and Century Falls. He eventually left the BBC for Granada Television, and in 1994 began writing adult television drama. His early scripts generally explored concepts of religion and sexuality among various backdrops: Revelations was a soap opera about organised religion and featured a lesbian vicar; Springhill was a soap drama about a Catholic family in contemporary Liverpool; The Grand explored society's opinion of subjects such as prostitution, abortion and homosexuality during the interwar period; and Queer as Folk recreated his experiences in the Manchester gay scene. His work in the 2000s included Bob & Rose, which portrayed a gay man who fell in love with a woman; The Second Coming, which focused on the second coming and deicide of Jesus Christ from a mostly non-religious point of view; Mine All Mine, a comedy about a family who discover they own the entire city of Swansea; and Casanova, an adaptation of the complete memoirs of Venetian adventurer Giacomo Casanova. (Full article...) Image 2 Armorial of Plantagenet The House of Plantagenet (/plæn?tæd??n?t/) was a royal house which originated from the lands of Anjou in France. The family held the English throne from 1154 (with the accession of Henry II, at the end of The Anarchy crisis) to 1485, when Richard III died in battle. Under the Plantagenets, England was transformed. The Plantagenet kings were often forced to negotiate compromises such as Magna Carta, which had served to constrain their royal power in return for financial and military support. The king was no longer considered an absolute monarch in the nation—holding the prerogatives of judgement, feudal tribute, and warfare—but now also had defined duties to the kingdom, underpinned by a sophisticated justice system. A distinct national identity was shaped by their conflict with the French, Scots, Welsh and Irish, and the establishment of the English language as the primary language. (Full article...) Image 3 The Sex Pistols in Amsterdam in 1977 (L–R: Cook, Matlock, Rotten and Jones) The Sex Pistols were an English punk rock band that formed in London in 1975. Although their initial career lasted just two and a half years, they are regarded as one of the most groundbreaking acts in the history of popular music. They were responsible for initiating the punk movement in the United Kingdom and inspiring many later punk and alternative rock musicians. Their fashion and hairstyles have been credited as a significant influence on punk image, and they are often associated with anarchism within music. The Sex Pistols originally comprised vocalist John Lydon (known at the time by his stage name "Johnny Rotten"), guitarist Steve Jones, drummer Paul Cook and bassist Glen Matlock. Matlock was replaced by Sid Vicious in early 1977. Under the management of Malcolm McLaren, the band attracted controversies that both captivated and appalled Britain. Through an obscenity-laced television interview in December 1976 and their May 1977 single "God Save the Queen", attacking Britons' social conformity and deference to the Crown, they popularised punk rock in the UK. It was banned not only by the BBC but also by nearly every independent radio station, making it the "most heavily censored record in British history". (Full article...) Image 4 Iginla with the Calgary Flames in 2008 Jarome Arthur-Leigh Adekunle Tig Junior Elvis Iginla (/d???ro?m ????nl?/; born July 1, 1977) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey winger. He played over 1500 games in the National Hockey League (NHL) for the Calgary Flames, Pittsburgh Penguins, Boston Bruins, Colorado Avalanche and Los Angeles Kings. As a junior, Iginla was a member of two Memorial Cup winning teams with the Kamloops Blazers and was named the Western Hockey League (WHL) Player of the Year in 1996. He was selected 11th overall by the Dallas Stars in the 1995 NHL Entry Draft, but was traded to Calgary prior to making his NHL debut. Nicknamed "Iggy", he led the NHL in goals and points in 2001–02, and won the Lester B. Pearson Award as its most valuable player as voted by the players. In 2003–04, Iginla led the league in goals for the second time and captained the Flames to the Stanley Cup Finals, leading the playoffs in goals. (Full article...) Image 5 Gielgud as Benedick in Much Ado About Nothing, 1959 Sir Arthur John Gielgud, OM, CH (/??i?l??d/; 14 April 1904 – 21 May 2000) was an English actor and theatre director whose career spanned eight decades. With Ralph Richardson and Laurence Olivier, he was one of the trinity of actors who dominated the British stage for much of the 20th century. A member of the Terry family theatrical dynasty, he gained his first paid acting work as a junior member of his cousin Phyllis Neilson-Terry's company in 1922. After studying at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art he worked in repertory theatre and in the West End before establishing himself at the Old Vic as an exponent of Shakespeare in 1929–31. During the 1930s Gielgud was a stage star in the West End and on Broadway, appearing in new works and classics. He began a parallel career as a director, and set up his own company at the Queen's Theatre, London. He was regarded by many as the finest Hamlet of his era, and was also known for high comedy roles such as John Worthing in The Importance of Being Earnest. In the 1950s Gielgud feared that his career was threatened when he was convicted and fined for a homosexual offence, but his colleagues and the public supported him loyally. When avant-garde plays began to supersede traditional West End productions in the later 1950s he found no new suitable stage roles, and for several years he was best known in the theatre for his one-man Shakespeare show Ages of Man. From the late 1960s he found new plays that suited him, by authors including Alan Bennett, David Storey and Harold Pinter. (Full article...) Image 6 André Messager, 1921 André Charles Prosper Messager (French: [m?sa?e]; 30 December 1853 – 24 February 1929) was a French composer, organist, pianist and conductor. His compositions include eight ballets and thirty opéras comiques, opérettes and other stage works, among which his ballet Les Deux Pigeons (1886) and opéra comique Véronique (1898) have had lasting success; Les P'tites Michu (1897) and Monsieur Beaucaire (1919) were also popular internationally. Messager took up the piano as a small child and later studied composition with, among others, Camille Saint-Saëns and Gabriel Fauré. He became a major figure in the musical life of Paris and later London, both as a conductor and a composer. Many of his Parisian works were also produced in the West End and some on Broadway; the most successful had long runs and numerous international revivals. He wrote two operatic works in English, and his later output included musical comedies for Sacha Guitry and Yvonne Printemps. (Full article...) Image 7 Portrait by Martin Archer Shee, 1833 William IV (William Henry; 21 August 1765 – 20 June 1837) was King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and King of Hanover from 26 June 1830 until his death in 1837. The third son of George III, William succeeded his elder brother George IV, becoming the last king and penultimate monarch of Britain's House of Hanover. William served in the Royal Navy in his youth, spending time in North America and the Caribbean, and was later nicknamed the "Sailor King". In 1789, he was created Duke of Clarence and St Andrews. In 1827, he was appointed as Britain's first Lord High Admiral since 1709. As his two older brothers died without leaving legitimate issue, he inherited the throne when he was 64 years old. His reign saw several reforms: the poor law was updated, child labour restricted, slavery abolished in nearly all of the British Empire, and the British electoral system refashioned by the Reform Act 1832. Although William did not engage in politics as much as his brother or his father, he was the last British monarch to appoint a prime minister contrary to the will of Parliament. He granted his German kingdom a short-lived liberal constitution. (Full article...) Image 8 Speer in 1933 Berthold Konrad Hermann Albert Speer (/?p??r/; German: [??pe???] (listen); 19 March 1905 – 1 September 1981) was a German architect who served as the Minister of Armaments and War Production in Nazi Germany during most of World War II. A close ally of Adolf Hitler, he was convicted at the Nuremberg trials and sentenced to 20 years in prison. An architect by training, Speer joined the Nazi Party in 1931. His architectural skills made him increasingly prominent within the Party, and he became a member of Hitler's inner circle. Hitler commissioned him to design and construct structures including the Reich Chancellery and the Nazi party rally grounds in Nuremberg. In 1937, Hitler appointed Speer as General Building Inspector for Berlin. In this capacity he was responsible for the Central Department for Resettlement that evicted Jewish tenants from their homes in Berlin. In February 1942, Speer was appointed as Reich Minister of Armaments and War Production. Using misleading statistics, he promoted himself as having performed an "armaments miracle" that was widely credited with keeping Germany in the war. In 1944, Speer established a task force to increase production of fighter aircraft. It became instrumental in the exploitation of slave labor for the benefit of the German war effort. (Full article...) Image 9 Hašek with the Detroit Red Wings in 2008 Dominik Hašek (Czech pronunciation: [?dom?n?k ??a??k], audio; born January 29, 1965) is a Czech former ice hockey goaltender. Widely regarded as one of the best goaltenders of all time, Hasek played for the Chicago Blackhawks, Buffalo Sabres, Detroit Red Wings and the Ottawa Senators in his 16-season National Hockey League career. During his years in Buffalo, he became one of the league's finest goaltenders, earning him the nickname "The Dominator". His strong play has been credited with establishing European goaltenders in a league previously dominated by North Americans. He is a two-time Stanley Cup champion, both with the Red Wings. Hašek was one of the league's most successful goaltenders of the 1990s and early 2000s. From 1993 to 2001, he won six Vezina Trophies, the most under the award's current system of voting for the best individual goalie. In 1998 he won his second consecutive Hart Memorial Trophy, becoming the first goaltender to win the award multiple times. During the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan, he led the Czech national ice hockey team to its first and only Olympic gold medal. The feat made him a popular figure in his home country and prompted hockey legend Wayne Gretzky to call him "the best player in the game". While with the Red Wings in 2002, Hašek became the first European-trained starting goaltender to win the Stanley Cup. In the process, he set a record for shutouts in a postseason year. (Full article...) Image 10 Herbert W. Greenfield (November 25, 1869 – August 23, 1949) was a Canadian politician who served as the fourth premier of Alberta from 1921 until 1925. Born in Winchester, Hampshire, in England, he immigrated to Canada in his late twenties, settling first in Ontario and then in Alberta, where he farmed. He soon became involved in the United Farmers of Alberta (UFA), a farmers' lobby organization that was in the process of becoming a political party, and was elected as the organization's vice president. Greenfield did not run in the 1921 provincial election, the first provincial general election in which the UFA fielded candidates, but when the UFA won a majority in the Legislature in that election he was chosen by the UFA caucus to serve as Premier. Like most of the UFA caucus, Greenfield had no experience in government and he struggled in the position. He relied extensively on his Attorney General, John E. Brownlee, for counsel on policy and strategy. He was unable to control his caucus, which did not generally believe in party discipline, and his government almost lost several votes in the Legislature despite its majority. He was unable to effectively address the problems facing farmers (including drought and low grain prices), bitter labour disputes in the coal industry, or the pronounced divisions in public opinion that had sprung up around prohibition (which his government ended). Despite this, his time as Premier saw the elimination of the provincial deficit, substantial progress in negotiating the transfer of natural resource rights from the federal government, and the creation of the Alberta Wheat Pool. He also named Irene Parlby as the province's first female cabinet minister. (Full article...) Image 11 Gold dinar minted in Aleppo in the name of Salih ibn Mirdas and recognizing the suzerainty of Fatimid caliph az-Zahir, 1028/29 CE Abu Ali Salih ibn Mirdas (Arabic: ??? ??? ???? ?? ??????, romanized: Ab? ?Al? ??li? ibn Mird?s), also known by his laqab (honorific epithet) Asad al-Dawla ("Lion of the State"), was the founder of the Mirdasid dynasty and emir of Aleppo from 1025 until his death in May 1029. At its peak, his emirate (principality) encompassed much of the western Jazira (Upper Mesopotamia), northern Syria and several central Syrian towns. With occasional interruption, Salih's descendants ruled Aleppo for the next five decades. Salih launched his career in 1008, when he seized the Euphrates river fortress of al-Rahba. In 1012, he was imprisoned and tortured by the emir of Aleppo, Mansur ibn Lu'lu'. Two years later he escaped, capturing Mansur in battle and releasing him for numerous concessions, including half of Aleppo's revenues. This cemented Salih as the paramount emir of his tribe, the Banu Kilab, many of whose chieftains had died in Mansur's dungeons. With his Bedouin warriors, Salih captured a string of fortresses along the Euphrates, including Manbij and Raqqa, by 1022. He later formed an alliance with the Banu Kalb and Banu Tayy tribes and supported their struggle against the Fatimids of Egypt. During this tribal rebellion, Salih annexed the central Syrian towns of Homs, Baalbek and Sidon, before conquering Fatimid-held Aleppo in 1025, bringing "to success the plan which guided his [Banu Kilab] forebears for a century", according to historian Thierry Bianquis. (Full article...) Image 12 Bradley Joseph (born 1965) is an American composer, arranger, and producer of contemporary instrumental music. His compositions include works for orchestra, quartet, and solo piano, while his musical style ranges from "quietly pensive mood music to a rich orchestration of classical depth and breadth". Active since 1983, Joseph has performed in front of millions of people around the world. He played various instruments in rock bands throughout the Midwest until 1989 when Greek composer Yanni hired him for his core band after hearing a tape of his original compositions. He was a featured concert keyboardist with Yanni through six major tours, most recently in 2003 for the 60-city Ethnicity tour. He appears in the multi-platinum album and concert film, Live at the Acropolis. Joseph also spent five years as musical director and lead keyboardist for Sheena Easton, including a 1995 performance on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno. (Full article...) Image 13 Willard Mitt Romney (born March 12, 1947) is an American politician and businessman serving as the junior United States senator from Utah since January 2019, succeeding Orrin Hatch. He served as the 70th governor of Massachusetts from 2003 to 2007 and was the Republican Party's nominee for president of the United States in the 2012 election, losing to the incumbent president, Barack Obama. Raised in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan by George and Lenore Romney, he spent over two years in France as a Mormon missionary. He married Ann Davies in 1969; they have five sons. Active in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) throughout his adult life, Romney served as bishop of his ward and later as a stake president for an area covering Boston and many of its suburbs. By 1971, he had participated in the political campaigns of both his parents. In 1971 Romney graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in English from Brigham Young University (BYU) and in 1975 he received a JD–MBA degree from Harvard. He became a management consultant and in 1977 joined Bain & Company in Boston. As Bain's chief executive officer (CEO), he helped lead the company out of a financial crisis. In 1984, he co-founded and led the spin-off company Bain Capital, a private equity investment firm that became one of the largest of its kind in the nation. (Full article...) Image 14 Hartman in character as Chick Hazard, Private Eye, c.?1978 Philip Edward Hartman (né Hartmann; September 24, 1948 – May 28, 1998) was a Canadian-American actor, comedian, screenwriter, and graphic designer. After graduating from California State University, Northridge with a degree in graphic arts, he designed album covers for bands including Poco and America. In 1975, Hartman joined the comedy group The Groundlings, where he helped Paul Reubens develop his character, Pee-wee Herman. Hartman co-wrote the film Pee-wee's Big Adventure and made recurring appearances as Captain Carl on Reubens's show Pee-wee's Playhouse. In 1986, Hartman joined the NBC sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live (SNL) as a cast member, and stayed for eight seasons until 1994. Nicknamed "Glue" for his ability to hold the show together and help other cast members, he won a Primetime Emmy Award for his SNL work in 1989. In 1995, he later starred as Bill McNeal in the sitcom NewsRadio after declining to return to SNL. He also voiced various characters on The Simpsons, and had minor roles in the films Houseguest, Sgt. Bilko, Jingle All the Way, and Small Soldiers. (Full article...) Image 15 Barbera in 1993 Joseph "Joe" Roland Barbera (/b??r?b??r?, ?b??rb?r?/ bar-BAIR-?, BAR-b?r-?; Italian: [bar?b??ra]; March 24, 1911 – December 18, 2006) was an American animator, director, producer, storyboard artist, and cartoon artist, who co-founded the animation studio and production company Hanna-Barbera. Born to Italian immigrants in New York City, Barbera joined Van Beuren Studios in 1927 and subsequently Terrytoons in 1929. In 1937, he moved to California and while working at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM), Barbera met William Hanna. The two men began a collaboration that was at first best known for producing Tom and Jerry. In 1957, after MGM dissolved their animation department, they co-founded Hanna-Barbera, which became the most successful television animation studio in the business, producing programs such as The Flintstones, Yogi Bear, Scooby-Doo, Top Cat, The Smurfs, Huckleberry Hound, and The Jetsons. In 1967, Hanna-Barbera was sold to Taft Broadcasting for $12 million, but Hanna and Barbera remained heads of the company. In 1991, the studio was sold to Turner Broadcasting System, which in turn was merged with Time Warner, owners of Warner Bros., in 1996; Hanna and Barbera stayed on as advisors. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Fred Thomas has been described as "the greatest Canadian athlete you've never heard of"? ... that actor Erik Knudsen worked with Kevin Drew from Broken Social Scene, his favorite band, in a fictional band based on them for the soundtrack of Scott Pilgrim vs. the World? ... that a business-firm party is a political party created and run by one person to further their own interests? ... that the biographies Uncertainty and Beyond Uncertainty show, contrary to popular belief, that there is no evidence that Werner Heisenberg impeded the German nuclear weapons program to prevent Hitler from obtaining a bomb? ... that Swedish writer Annie Åkerhielm was an active campaigner against women's suffrage and democracy? ... that a line from the 1899 poem "Sympathy" provided the title for Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings? ... that Samuel Pepys wrote of Royal Navy Commissioner Sir Thomas Hervey: "a coxcombe he is and will never be better in the business of the Navy"? ... that plant scientist Norman C. Deno's research on seed germination techniques resulted in him writing a book with germination methods for thousands of species? ... that Pope Pius VI named Leonard Neale the coadjutor bishop of Baltimore in 1795, but Neale did not learn of this until 1800? ... that New Zealand writer Jessie Weston wrote for William Ernest Henley's magazine for 18 months without him knowing she was a woman? ... that Javier Bardem is the first Spanish actor to win an Academy Award, which he won for his performance in No Country for Old Men? ... that President Ulysses S. Grant planned but failed to annex the Dominican Republic from his summer cottage? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 2Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Image 3Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 4James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 5A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 6Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 7Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 8John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Frederick DouglassPhoto credit: George K. Warren American abolitionist, editor, orator, author, statesman and reformer Frederick Douglass, shown here in 1879. Born a slave, Douglass was one of the most prominent figures in African American history and a formidable public presence. He was a firm believer in the equality of all people, whether black, female, American Indian, or recent immigrant. He was fond of saying, "I would unite with anybody to do right and with nobody to do wrong." February is Black History Month in the United States and Canada. More selected portraits Image 2 Salman KhurshidPhoto: Muhammad Mahdi Karim Salman Khurshid is an Indian politician from the Indian National Congress. He serves as the Cabinet Minister of the Ministry of External Affairs. Previously Khurshid served as Minister of Law and Justice. More selected portraits Image 3 Ida B. WellsPhotograph: Mary Garrity; restoration: Adam Cuerden Ida B. Wells (1862–1931) was an African-American journalist, newspaper editor, suffragist, sociologist, and an early leader in the civil rights movement. Born into slavery in Holly Springs, Mississippi, Wells and her family were freed by the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863. Despite losing her parents to yellow fever when she was sixteen, Wells attended Fisk University and became a teacher. Politically active since her youth, she also became a writer on race issues and campaigned against lynching; in this latter capacity she published two influential pamphlets and traveled throughout the United States and the United Kingdom. Wells also helped establish the National Association of Colored Women and the National Afro-American Council. More selected portraits Image 4 Theodore Roosevelt and John MuirPhoto credit: Underwood and Underwood U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt (left) and nature preservationist John Muir, founder of the Sierra Club, stand together on Glacier Point in Yosemite National Park. In the background can be seen Upper and Lower Yosemite Falls. During this trip in 1903, Muir convinced Roosevelt to add Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove to the park, which had been established in 1890. More selected portraits Image 5 Lillian GishPhoto credit: Bain News Service A portrait of Lillian Gish from 1921. Gish was one of the first female movie stars, called "The First Lady of the Silent Screen", starting in 1912 and continuing to appear in films until 1987. The American Film Institute named Gish 17th among the greatest female stars of all time and awarded her a Life Achievement Award, making her the only recipient who was a major figure in the silent era. Remarkably, she never won an Academy Award for her work, although she did receive a Special Academy Award in 1971. More selected portraits Image 6 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. More selected portraits Image 7 Beppe GrilloPhotograph: Niccolò Caranti Beppe Grillo (b. 1948) is an Italian comedian, actor, blogger and political activist who established the Five Star Movement in 2009. Born in Genoa, Grillo became well known as a comic through several television shows in the 1980s, but following jokes which attacked the corruption of the Italian Socialist Party and its leader Bettino Craxi he was banned from television. Grillo continued to tour as a comedian while speaking out against corruption and banking scandals, and in 2005 Time named him a European hero. More selected portraits Image 8 Mark RuttePhoto: Nick van Ormondt Mark Rutte is (as of 2011) the incumbent Prime Minister of the Netherlands. He has been the leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) party since 2006. In the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in their occupying 31 of the 150 seats in the House of Representatives. When he was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal Prime Minister in the Netherlands in 92 years. More selected portraits Image 9 Francisco GoyaPainting: Vicente López y Portaña Francisco Goya (1746–1828) was a Spanish romantic painter and printmaker regarded as both the last of the Old Masters and the first of the moderns. Goya was a court painter to the Spanish Crown, and through his works was both a commentator on and chronicler of his era. This portrait was completed when Goya was 80 years old. More selected portraits Image 10 Brian NankervisPhoto: John O'Neill; edit: JJ Harrison Brian Nankervis (b. 1956), an Australian comedian and writer, shown here during a live performance. Nankervis rose to popularity while playing Raymond J. Bartholomeuz on Hey Hey It's Saturday; since 2005 he has been a host of the gameshow RocKwiz. More selected portraits Image 11 Buster KeatonPhoto credit: Bain News Service Along with Charlie Chaplin and Harold Lloyd, Buster Keaton was one of the most important comic actors of the silent era. His trademark was physical comedy with a stoic, deadpan expression on his face, earning him the nickname "The Great Stone Face". He appeared in dozens of films, and his The General was voted the fifteenth-best film of all time by Sight & Sound readers. Entertainment Weekly also named him the seventh-greatest film director in history. More selected portraits Image 12 Fridtjof NansenPhoto: Henry Van der Weyde; Restoration: Smalljim/PLW Fridtjof Nansen (1861–1930) was a Norwegian explorer, scientist, diplomat, humanitarian and Nobel Peace Prize laureate. He led the team that made the first crossing of the Greenland interior in 1888, and won international fame after reaching a record northern latitude of 86°14? during his North Pole expedition of 1893–96. Although he retired from exploration after his return to Norway, his techniques of polar travel and his innovations in equipment and clothing influenced a generation of subsequent Arctic and Antarctic expeditions. In 1922 he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his work on behalf of the displaced victims of the First World War and related conflicts. More selected portraits Image 13 Peter Oliver (painter)Portrait: Peter Oliver An 8.8-centimetre (3.5 in) tall self-portrait of the English miniaturist Peter Oliver (1594–1648). He often worked with watercolours. More selected portraits Image 14 Frédéric ChopinPhoto credit: Louis-Auguste Bisson The only known photograph of Frédéric Chopin, often incorrectly described as a daguerreotype. It is believed to have been taken in 1849 during the degenerative stages of his tuberculosis, shortly before his death. Chopin, a Polish pianist and composer of the Romantic era, is widely regarded as one of the most famous, influential, admired and prolific composers for the piano. He moved to Paris at the age of twenty, adopting the French variant of his name, "Frédéric-François", by which he is now known. More selected portraits Image 15 Lucy ArbellPhotograph credit: Nadar; restored by Adam Cuerden Lucy Arbell (8 June 1878 – 21 May 1947), was a French mezzo-soprano whose operatic career was largely centred in Paris. Her career was particularly associated with the composer Jules Massenet, who created a number of operatic roles for her before his death in 1912. This carte de visite of Arbell was created by the French photographer Nadar. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 23 Births 1616 - John Wallis, English mathematician (d. 1703) (pictured) 1804 - Franklin Pierce, 14th President of the United States (d. 1869) 1837 - Johannes Diderik van der Waals, Dutch physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1923) 1887 - Boris Karloff, British actor (d. 1969) 1888 - Harpo Marx, American comedian (d. 1964) Deaths 1814 - Elbridge Gerry, Vice President of the United States of America (b. 1744) 1902 - Walter Reed, American bacteriologist (b. 1851) 1979 - Merle Oberon, British actress (b. 1911) 1990 - Roald Dahl, British author (b. 1916) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 22 November 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections, losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) 21 November 2021 – 2021 Chilean general election Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) 16 November 2021 – The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) 15 November 2021 – China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) Updated: 21:33, 22 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "Not one of us knows what effect his life produces, and what he gives to others; that is hidden from us and must remain so, though we are often allowed to see some little fraction of it, so that we may not lose courage." — Albert Schweitzer In The Spiritual Life, 1947 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Harvey Bernard Milk (May 22, 1930 – November 27, 1978) was an American politician and the first openly gay elected official in the history of California, where he was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors. Although he was the most pro-LGBT politician in the United States at the time, politics and activism were not his early interests; he was neither open about his sexuality nor civically active until he was 40, after his experiences in the counterculture movement of the 1960s. In 1972, Milk moved from New York City to the Castro District of San Francisco amid a migration of gay and bisexual men. He took advantage of the growing political and economic power of the neighborhood to promote his interests and unsuccessfully ran three times for political office. Milk's theatrical campaigns earned him increasing popularity, and in 1977 he won a seat as a city supervisor. His election was made possible by a key component of a shift in San Francisco politics. (Full article...) Image 2 Shepard in 1971 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. (November 18, 1923 – July 21, 1998) was an American astronaut, naval aviator, test pilot, and businessman. In 1961, he became the second person and the first American to travel into space, and in 1971, he walked on the Moon. A graduate of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Shepard saw action with the surface navy during World War II. He became a naval aviator in 1946, and a test pilot in 1950. He was selected as one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts in 1959, and in May 1961 he made the first crewed Project Mercury flight, Mercury-Redstone 3, in a spacecraft he named Freedom 7. His craft entered space, but was not capable of achieving orbit. He became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space, and the first space traveler to manually control the orientation of his craft. In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission. He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B Freedom 7 II in honor of his first spacecraft, but the mission was canceled. (Full article...) Image 3 Jason Sendwe (1917 – 19 June 1964) was a Congolese politician and a leader of the Association Générale des Baluba du Katanga (BALUBAKAT) party. He served as Second Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Republic of the Congo) from August 1961 until January 1963, and as President of the Province of North Katanga from September 1963 until his death, with a brief interruption. Sendwe was born in 1917 in Mwanya, Kabongo Territory, Belgian Congo, to a Baluba family. He was educated in Methodist schools and nursing institutions. Unable to become a doctor due to a lack of medical schools in the Congo, he found work as a minister, teacher, and nurse. He became involved in several cultural organisations, and in 1957 founded BALUBAKAT to fight for the interests of the Baluba. He espoused nationalism and believed that the Congo should remain a united country after Belgian rule. In May 1960, shortly before the country's independence, he was elected to the newly constituted Chamber of Deputies. Sendwe sought to obtain control over the government of Katanga Province, but lost a power struggle against his rival, Moïse Tshombe, and the Confédération des associations tribales du Katanga (CONAKAT) party. Regardless, Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba nominated him for the office of State Commissioner for Katanga. (Full article...) Image 4 Hattie Jacques (/d?e?ks/; born Josephine Edwina Jaques; 7 February 1922 – 6 October 1980) was an English comedy actress of stage, radio and screen. She is best known as a regular of the Carry On films, where she typically played strict, no-nonsense characters, but was also a prolific television and radio performer. Jacques started her career in 1944 with an appearance at the Players' Theatre in London, but came to national prominence through her appearances on three highly popular radio series on the BBC: with Tommy Handley on It's That Man Again; with ventriloquist Peter Brough on Educating Archie; and then with Tony Hancock on Hancock's Half Hour. After the Second World War Jacques made her cinematic debut in Green for Danger (1946), in which she had a brief, uncredited role. From 1958 to 1974 she appeared in 14 Carry On films, playing various roles including the formidable hospital matron. On television she had a long professional partnership with Eric Sykes, with whom she co-starred in his long-running series Sykes and Sykes and a.... The role endeared her to the public and the two became staples of British television. (Full article...) Image 5 Leslie Groves, pictured here as a major general. Lieutenant General Leslie Richard Groves Jr. (17 August 1896 – 13 July 1970) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who oversaw the construction of the Pentagon and directed the Manhattan Project, a top secret research project that developed the atomic bomb during World War II. The son of a U.S. Army chaplain, Groves lived at various Army posts during his childhood. In 1918, he graduated fourth in his class at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and was commissioned into the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. In 1929, he went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition to conduct a survey for the Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal. Following the 1931 earthquake, Groves took over Managua's water supply system, for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit. He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1935 and 1936; and the Army War College in 1938 and 1939, after which he was posted to the War Department General Staff. Groves developed "a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty" and in 1940 he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General, tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress. In August 1941, he was appointed to create the gigantic office complex for the War Department's 40,000 staff that would ultimately become the Pentagon. (Full article...) Image 6 The LaRouche criminal trials in the mid-1980s stemmed from federal and state investigations into the activities of American political activist Lyndon LaRouche and members of his movement. They were charged with conspiring to commit fraud and soliciting loans they had no intention of repaying. LaRouche and his supporters disputed the charges, claiming the trials were politically motivated. In 1986, hundreds of state and federal officers raided LaRouche offices in Virginia and Massachusetts. A federal grand jury in Boston, Massachusetts, indicted LaRouche and 12 associates on credit card fraud and obstruction of justice. The subsequent trial, described as an "extravaganza", was repeatedly delayed and ended in mistrial. Following the mistrial, a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Virginia, indicted LaRouche and six associates. After a short trial in 1988, LaRouche was convicted of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and tax evasion, and was sentenced to prison for fifteen years. He entered prison in 1989 and was paroled five years later. At the same trial, his associates received lesser sentences for mail fraud and conspiracy. In separate state trials in Virginia and New York, 13 associates received terms ranging from one month to 77 years. The Virginia state trials were described as the highest-profile cases that the state Attorney General's office had ever prosecuted. Fourteen states issued injunctions against LaRouche-related organizations. Three LaRouche-related organizations were forced into bankruptcy after failing to pay contempt of court fines. (Full article...) Image 7 Marjorie Cameron Parsons Kimmel (April 23, 1922 – July 24, 1995), who professionally used the mononym Cameron, was an American artist, poet, actress and occultist. A follower of Thelema, the new religious movement established by the English occultist Aleister Crowley, she was married to rocket pioneer and fellow Thelemite Jack Parsons. Born in Belle Plaine, Iowa, Cameron volunteered for service in the United States Navy during the Second World War, after which she settled in Pasadena, California. There she met Parsons, who believed her to be the "elemental" woman that he had invoked in the early stages of a series of sex magic rituals called the Babalon Working. They entered into a relationship and were married in 1946. Their relationship was often strained, although Parsons sparked her involvement in Thelema and occultism. After Parsons' death in an explosion at their home in 1952, Cameron came to suspect that her husband had been assassinated and began rituals to communicate with his spirit. Moving to Beaumont, she established a multi-racial occult group called The Children, which dedicated itself to sex magic rituals with the intent of producing mixed-race "moon children" who would be devoted to the god Horus. The group soon dissolved, largely because many of its members became concerned by Cameron's increasingly apocalyptic predictions. (Full article...) Image 8 August Meyszner wearing the rank of SS-Oberführer in 1938 August Edler von Meyszner (3 August 1886 – 24 January 1947) was an Austrian Gendarmerie officer, right-wing politician, and senior Ordnungspolizei (order police) officer who held the post of Higher SS and Police Leader in the German-occupied territory of Serbia from January 1942 to March 1944, during World War II. He has been described as one of Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler's most brutal subordinates. Meyszner began his career as an officer in the Gendarmerie, served on the Italian Front during World War I and reached the rank of Major der Polizei by 1921. He joined the Austrian Nazi Party in September 1925 and became a right-wing parliamentary deputy and provincial minister in the Austrian province of Styria in 1930. Due to his involvement with the Nazis, Meyszner was forcibly retired in 1933 and arrested in February 1934, but released after three months at the Wöllersdorf concentration camp. That July, he was rearrested following an attempted coup, but escaped police custody and fled to Nazi Germany, where he joined the Ordnungspolizei (Orpo) and then the Allgemeine SS. After police postings in Austria, Germany and occupied Norway, Himmler appointed Meyszner as Higher SS and Police Leader in Serbia in early 1942. He was one of few Orpo officers to be appointed to such a role. (Full article...) Image 9 Sir James Chadwick, CH, FRS (20 October 1891 – 24 July 1974) was a British physicist who was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of the neutron in 1932. In 1941, he wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report, which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts. He was the head of the British team that worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II. He was knighted in Britain in 1945 for his achievements in physics. Chadwick graduated from the Victoria University of Manchester in 1911, where he studied under Ernest Rutherford (known as the "father of nuclear physics"). At Manchester, he continued to study under Rutherford until he was awarded his MSc in 1913. The same year, Chadwick was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851. He elected to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger in Berlin. Using Geiger's recently developed Geiger counter, Chadwick was able to demonstrate that beta radiation produced a continuous spectrum, and not discrete lines as had been thought. Still in Germany when World War I broke out in Europe, he spent the next four years in the Ruhleben internment camp. (Full article...) Image 10 Billings Learned Hand (/?l??rn?d/ LURN-id; January 27, 1872 – August 18, 1961) was an American jurist, lawyer, and judicial philosopher. He served as a federal trial judge on the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York and later as an appellate judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Born and raised in Albany, New York, Hand majored in philosophy at Harvard College and graduated with honors from Harvard Law School. After a short career as a lawyer in Albany and New York City, he was appointed at the age of 37 as a Federal District Judge in Manhattan in 1909. The profession suited his detached and open-minded temperament, and his decisions soon won him a reputation for craftsmanship and authority. Between 1909 and 1914, under the influence of Herbert Croly's social theories, Hand supported New Nationalism. He ran unsuccessfully as the Progressive Party's candidate for Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals in 1913, but withdrew from active politics shortly afterwards. In 1924, President Calvin Coolidge promoted Hand to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which he went on to lead as the Senior Circuit Judge (later retitled Chief Judge) from 1939 until his semi-retirement in 1951. Scholars have recognized the Second Circuit under Hand as one of the finest appeals courts in the country's history. Friends and admirers often lobbied for Hand's promotion to the Supreme Court, but circumstances and his political past conspired against his appointment. (Full article...) Image 11 Margaret Lea Houston, c. 1839 Margaret Lea Houston (April 11, 1819 – December 3, 1867) was First Lady of the Republic of Texas during her husband Sam Houston's second term as President of the Republic of Texas. They met following the first of his two non-consecutive terms as the Republic's president, and married when he was a representative in the Congress of the Republic of Texas. She was his third wife, remaining with him until his death. She came from a close-knit family in Alabama, many of whom also moved to Texas when she married the man who was an accomplished politician in both Tennessee and Texas, and who had won the Battle of San Jacinto during the Texas Revolution. The couple had eight children, and she gave birth to most of them while he was away attending to politics. Her mother Nancy Lea was a constant in their lives, helping with the children, managing the household help, and always providing either financial assistance or temporary housing. With the help of her extended family in Texas, Margaret convinced her husband to give up both alcohol and profane language. He believed his wife to be an exemplary woman of faith and, under her influence, converted to the Baptist denomination, after he had many years earlier been baptized a Catholic in Nacogdoches, Texas. (Full article...) Image 12 Joseph Havens Richards SJ (born Havens Cowles Richards; November 8, 1851 – June 9, 1923) was an American Catholic priest and Jesuit who became a prominent president of Georgetown University, where he instituted major reforms and significantly enhanced the quality and stature of the university. Born to a prominent Ohio family, his father was an Episcopal priest who controversially converted to Catholicism and had the infant Richards secretly baptized as a Catholic. Richards became the president of Georgetown University in 1888 and undertook significant construction, such as the completion of Healy Hall, which included work on Gaston Hall and Riggs Library, and the building of Dahlgren Chapel. Richards sought to transform Georgetown into a modern, comprehensive university. To that end, he bolstered the graduate programs, expanded the School of Medicine and Law School , established the Georgetown University Hospital, improved the astronomical observatory, and recruited prominent faculty. He also navigated tensions with the newly established Catholic University of America, which was located in the same city. Richards fought anti-Catholic discrimination by Ivy League universities, resulting in Harvard Law School admitting graduates of some Jesuit universities. (Full article...) Image 13 Turner in the 1890s Emma Louisa Turner or E L Turner FLS, FZS, HMBOU (9 June 1867 – 13 August 1940) was an English ornithologist and pioneering bird photographer. Turner took up photography at age 34, after meeting the wildlife photographer Richard Kearton. She joined the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) in 1901, and by 1904 she had started to give talks illustrated with her own photographic slides; by 1908, when aged 41, she was established as a professional lecturer. Turner spent part of each year in Norfolk, and her 1911 image of a nestling bittern in Norfolk was the first evidence of the species' return to the United Kingdom as a breeding bird after its local extinction in the late 19th century. She also travelled widely in the United Kingdom and abroad photographing birds. (Full article...) Image 14 Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd's name in Arabic calligraphy Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd al-Thaqafi (Arabic: ??????????? ???? ????? ??????? ????????????, al-Mukht?r ibn Ab? ?Ubayd al-Thaqaf?y; c. 622 – 3 April 687) was a pro-Alid revolutionary based in Kufa, who led a rebellion against the Umayyad Caliphate in 685 and ruled over most of Iraq for eighteen months during the Second Fitna. Born in Ta'if, Mukhtar moved to Iraq at a young age and grew up in Kufa. Following the death of Husayn ibn Ali, a grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, at the hands of the Umayyad army in the Battle of Karbala in 680, he allied with the rival caliph Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr in Mecca, but the alliance was short-lived. Mukhtar returned to Kufa where he declared Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, a son of caliph Ali (r. 656–661) and brother of Husayn, the mahdi and the imam, and called for the establishment of an Alid caliphate and retaliation for Husayn's killing. He took over Kufa in October 685, after expelling its Zubayrid governor, and later ordered the execution of those involved in the killing of Husayn. Hostile relations with Ibn al-Zubayr ultimately led to Mukhtar's death by the forces of the Zubayrid governor of Basra, Mus'ab ibn al-Zubayr, following a four-month siege. (Full article...) Image 15 Engraving of Percy Thomas Percy (c.?1560 – 8 November 1605) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605. A tall, physically impressive man, little is known of his early life beyond his matriculation in 1579 at the University of Cambridge, and his marriage in 1591 to Martha Wright. In 1596 his second cousin once removed, Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland, appointed him constable of Alnwick Castle and made him responsible for the Percy family's northern estates. He served the earl in the Low Countries in about 1600–1601, and in the years before 1603 was his intermediary in a series of confidential communications with King James VI of Scotland. Following James's accession to the English throne in 1603, Percy became disenchanted with the new king, who he supposed had reneged on his promises of toleration for English Catholics. His meeting in June 1603 with Robert Catesby, a religious zealot similarly unimpressed with the new royal Stuart dynasty, led the following year to his joining Catesby's conspiracy to kill the king and his ministers by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder. Percy helped fund the group and secured the leases to certain properties in London, one of which was the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords, in which the gunpowder was finally placed. The conspirators also planned to instigate an uprising in the Midlands and to simultaneously kidnap James's daughter, Princess Elizabeth. Percy was to remain in London and secure the capture of her brother, Prince Henry. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Swedish painter, ceramist, designer, and writer Tyra Lundgren was one of the most versatile artists of the 20th century? ... that Francis Dzierozynski's dispute with Archbishop Ambrose Maréchal over land ownership in Maryland escalated to involve Pope Pius VII and two U.S. secretaries of state? ... that Swedish actor Christopher Wollter started his career as a teenage reporter for the SVT children's television show Barnjournalen? ... that after surviving the Holocaust, writer Trudi Birger moved to Israel with her family and founded a non-profit dental clinic? ... that President Barack Obama celebrated his 50th birthday by playing basketball with Shane Battier, LeBron James, Magic Johnson, Maya Moore, Alonzo Mourning, Joakim Noah, Chris Paul, and Derrick Rose? ... that the 2017 Bishop Maginn High School baseball team largely consisted of Karen refugees? ... that Flying Apsaras Award winner Tian Chengren worked as an actor until the age of 92? ... that three members of the Harrison family of Virginia served as President of the United States? ... that at the age of 12, the Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse became the youngest ever Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo Calf Pipe and Bundle? ... that Ugandan president Idi Amin reportedly shot dead the leader of the Arube uprising when the latter tried to arrest him? ... that Swedish writer Annie Åkerhielm was an active campaigner against women's suffrage and democracy? ... that a line from the 1899 poem "Sympathy" provided the title for Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 2Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 3James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 4A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 5Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 6John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 7Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 8Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Vincent van GoghPainting credit: John Russell Vincent van Gogh is an oil-on-canvas portrait by Australian painter John Russell, dated 1886. It depicts Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, who became lifelong friends with Russell after meeting him at Fernand Cormon's atelier in Paris, which they both attended. Painted in a realist and academic manner, the portrait shows hints of the impressionist techniques with which they began experimenting in the latter half of the 1880s. It is the earliest of three portraits painted of Van Gogh by his contemporaries, the other two being Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887) and Paul Gauguin's The Painter of Sunflowers (1888). Van Gogh seems to have been particularly attached to Russell's portrait, which Russell gifted to him as a mark of their friendship. The painting passed from Van Gogh to his brother Theo and then to their family; it is now in the collection of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. More selected portraits Image 2 Jean-Baptiste CarpeauxImage credit: The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux was a 19th-century French sculptor and painter who sought to inject movement and spontaneity into his works. This engraving, done to commemorate him after his death, shows his sculpture Flore below him, and others of his works above. In his time, some of his works, particularly La Danse, were criticised as indecent, but today his sculptures are exhibited in major museums of art worldwide. More selected portraits Image 3 Walt WhitmanPhotograph: George C. Cox; restoration: Adam Cuerden Walt Whitman (1819–1892) was an American poet, essayist and journalist. A humanist, he was a part of the transition between transcendentalism and realism, incorporating both views in his works. Whitman is among the most influential poets in the American canon, often called the father of free verse. His work was very controversial in its time, particularly his poetry collection Leaves of Grass (first published in 1855, but continuously revised until Whitman's death), which was described as obscene for its overt sexuality. More selected portraits Image 4 Pedro II of BrazilPhoto: Mathew Brady/Levin Corbin Handy Emperor of Brazil Pedro II was the second and last ruler of the Empire of Brazil, reigning for over 58 years. Born in Rio de Janeiro, his father Pedro I's abrupt abdication and flight to Europe in 1831 left him as Emperor at the age of five. Inheriting an Empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II turned Brazil into an emerging power in the international arena. On November 15, 1889, he was overthrown in a coup d'état by a clique of military leaders who declared Brazil a republic. However, he had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support, and did not support any attempt to restore the monarchy. More selected portraits Image 5 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 6 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. More selected portraits Image 7 Robert William ThomsonImage credit: Illustrated London News The obituary of Robert William Thomson as it appeared in the Illustrated London News on 29 March 1873. Thomson was the inventor of the pneumatic tyre, the elliptic rotary steam engine and locomotive traction engine, the portable steam crane, and numerous other inventions. The obituary preceding his is for Evelyn Denison, 1st Viscount Ossington. More selected portraits Image 8 Mark RuttePhoto: Nick van Ormondt Mark Rutte is (as of 2011) the incumbent Prime Minister of the Netherlands. He has been the leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) party since 2006. In the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in their occupying 31 of the 150 seats in the House of Representatives. When he was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal Prime Minister in the Netherlands in 92 years. More selected portraits Image 9 Louis PasteurPhotograph: Nadar; restoration: Chris Woodrich Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) was a French chemist and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation and pasteurization. He reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His medical discoveries provided direct support for the germ theory of disease and its application in clinical medicine. Together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch, he is regarded as one of the three main founders of bacteriology. More selected portraits Image 10 Alexz JohnsonPhoto: Epitome Pictures Alexz Johnson (b. 1986) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and actress, best known for roles as Jude Harrison in the CTV series Instant Star (character shown here), Annie Thelan in the Disney Channel series So Weird, and as Erin Ulmer in the 2006 horror film Final Destination 3. Her album Voodoo was released in 2010. More selected portraits Image 11 Wayne GretzkyPhoto credit: Håkan Dahlström Ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky, as a member of the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL) in 1997. Gretzky, nicknamed "The Great One", is widely considered the best hockey player of all time. Upon his retirement in 1999, he held forty regular-season records, fifteen playoff records, and six All-Star records. He is the only NHL player to total over 200 points in one season—a feat he accomplished four times. In addition, he tallied over 100 points in 15 NHL seasons, 13 of them consecutively. He is the only player to have his number (99) officially retired by the NHL for all teams. More selected portraits Image 12 Enoch PowellPhotograph: Allan Warren Enoch Powell (1912–98), a professor of Ancient Greek by age 25 and brigadier during World War II, took up politics in the late 1940s and in the 1960s was selected for several cabinet positions. In 1968, he gave the "Rivers of Blood" speech about the dangers of immigration to the United Kingdom and of proposed anti-discrimination legislation. More selected portraits Image 13 K. T. ThomasPhotograph credit: Augustus Binu K. T. Thomas (born 30 January 1937) is a former judge of the Supreme Court of India, known for his strong opinions on Indian socio-political matters. He was selected as a district and sessions judge in 1977, and became a judge of the Kerala High Court in 1985. A decade later, he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court, on which he served until retiring in 2002. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Indian government in 2007 for services in the field of social affairs. More selected portraits Image 14 Nataliya GotsiyPhoto credit: Peter Duhon Ukrainian fashion model Nataliya Gotsiy modeling for Cynthia Rowley, Spring 2007 New York Fashion Week. She was the winner of the Ford Supermodel of the World 2004 search. She has appeared on the cover of French Elle and Italian Marie Claire and modeled for Behnaz Sarafpour, Christian Lacroix, Diane von Furstenberg, Dior, Dolce & Gabbana, Dries van Noten, Gucci, Oscar de la Renta, Valentino, and Vivienne Westwood, among others. More selected portraits Image 15 Alice PaulPhotograph credit: Harris & Ewing; restored by Adam Cuerden Alice Paul was an American suffragist, feminist, and women's-rights activist, and one of the main leaders and strategists of the campaign for the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits sex discrimination in the right to vote. Along with Lucy Burns and others, she strategized events such as the Woman Suffrage Procession and the Silent Sentinels as part of the successful campaign that resulted in the amendment's passage on August 18, 1920. This photograph of Paul was taken in 1915 by the Harris & Ewing photographic studio in Washington, D.C. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 24 Births 1632 - Baruch Spinoza, Dutch philosopher (d. 1677) 1784 - Zachary Taylor, 12th President of the United States (d. 1850) (pictured) 1849 - Frances Hodgson Burnett, British-born author (d. 1924) 1853 - Bat Masterson, American gunfighter (d. 1921) 1925 - William F. Buckley Jr., American writer (d. 2008) 1946 - Ted Bundy, American serial killer (d. 1989) Deaths 1957 - Diego Rivera, Mexican painter (b. 1886) 1963 - Lee Harvey Oswald, accused assassin of John F. Kennedy (b. 1939) 1991 - Freddie Mercury, Zanzibar-born singer (Queen) (b. 1946) 2005 - Pat Morita, American actor (b. 1932) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 24 November 2021 – Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) 22 November 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) 21 November 2021 – 2021 Chilean general election Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Updated: 21:33, 24 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "Not one of us knows what effect his life produces, and what he gives to others; that is hidden from us and must remain so, though we are often allowed to see some little fraction of it, so that we may not lose courage." — Albert Schweitzer In The Spiritual Life, 1947 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Harvey Bernard Milk (May 22, 1930 – November 27, 1978) was an American politician and the first openly gay elected official in the history of California, where he was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors. Although he was the most pro-LGBT politician in the United States at the time, politics and activism were not his early interests; he was neither open about his sexuality nor civically active until he was 40, after his experiences in the counterculture movement of the 1960s. In 1972, Milk moved from New York City to the Castro District of San Francisco amid a migration of gay and bisexual men. He took advantage of the growing political and economic power of the neighborhood to promote his interests and unsuccessfully ran three times for political office. Milk's theatrical campaigns earned him increasing popularity, and in 1977 he won a seat as a city supervisor. His election was made possible by a key component of a shift in San Francisco politics. (Full article...) Image 2 Shepard in 1971 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. (November 18, 1923 – July 21, 1998) was an American astronaut, naval aviator, test pilot, and businessman. In 1961, he became the second person and the first American to travel into space, and in 1971, he walked on the Moon. A graduate of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Shepard saw action with the surface navy during World War II. He became a naval aviator in 1946, and a test pilot in 1950. He was selected as one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts in 1959, and in May 1961 he made the first crewed Project Mercury flight, Mercury-Redstone 3, in a spacecraft he named Freedom 7. His craft entered space, but was not capable of achieving orbit. He became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space, and the first space traveler to manually control the orientation of his craft. In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission. He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B Freedom 7 II in honor of his first spacecraft, but the mission was canceled. (Full article...) Image 3 Jason Sendwe (1917 – 19 June 1964) was a Congolese politician and a leader of the Association Générale des Baluba du Katanga (BALUBAKAT) party. He served as Second Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Republic of the Congo) from August 1961 until January 1963, and as President of the Province of North Katanga from September 1963 until his death, with a brief interruption. Sendwe was born in 1917 in Mwanya, Kabongo Territory, Belgian Congo, to a Baluba family. He was educated in Methodist schools and nursing institutions. Unable to become a doctor due to a lack of medical schools in the Congo, he found work as a minister, teacher, and nurse. He became involved in several cultural organisations, and in 1957 founded BALUBAKAT to fight for the interests of the Baluba. He espoused nationalism and believed that the Congo should remain a united country after Belgian rule. In May 1960, shortly before the country's independence, he was elected to the newly constituted Chamber of Deputies. Sendwe sought to obtain control over the government of Katanga Province, but lost a power struggle against his rival, Moïse Tshombe, and the Confédération des associations tribales du Katanga (CONAKAT) party. Regardless, Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba nominated him for the office of State Commissioner for Katanga. (Full article...) Image 4 Hattie Jacques (/d?e?ks/; born Josephine Edwina Jaques; 7 February 1922 – 6 October 1980) was an English comedy actress of stage, radio and screen. She is best known as a regular of the Carry On films, where she typically played strict, no-nonsense characters, but was also a prolific television and radio performer. Jacques started her career in 1944 with an appearance at the Players' Theatre in London, but came to national prominence through her appearances on three highly popular radio series on the BBC: with Tommy Handley on It's That Man Again; with ventriloquist Peter Brough on Educating Archie; and then with Tony Hancock on Hancock's Half Hour. After the Second World War Jacques made her cinematic debut in Green for Danger (1946), in which she had a brief, uncredited role. From 1958 to 1974 she appeared in 14 Carry On films, playing various roles including the formidable hospital matron. On television she had a long professional partnership with Eric Sykes, with whom she co-starred in his long-running series Sykes and Sykes and a.... The role endeared her to the public and the two became staples of British television. (Full article...) Image 5 Leslie Groves, pictured here as a major general. Lieutenant General Leslie Richard Groves Jr. (17 August 1896 – 13 July 1970) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who oversaw the construction of the Pentagon and directed the Manhattan Project, a top secret research project that developed the atomic bomb during World War II. The son of a U.S. Army chaplain, Groves lived at various Army posts during his childhood. In 1918, he graduated fourth in his class at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and was commissioned into the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. In 1929, he went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition to conduct a survey for the Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal. Following the 1931 earthquake, Groves took over Managua's water supply system, for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit. He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1935 and 1936; and the Army War College in 1938 and 1939, after which he was posted to the War Department General Staff. Groves developed "a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty" and in 1940 he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General, tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress. In August 1941, he was appointed to create the gigantic office complex for the War Department's 40,000 staff that would ultimately become the Pentagon. (Full article...) Image 6 The LaRouche criminal trials in the mid-1980s stemmed from federal and state investigations into the activities of American political activist Lyndon LaRouche and members of his movement. They were charged with conspiring to commit fraud and soliciting loans they had no intention of repaying. LaRouche and his supporters disputed the charges, claiming the trials were politically motivated. In 1986, hundreds of state and federal officers raided LaRouche offices in Virginia and Massachusetts. A federal grand jury in Boston, Massachusetts, indicted LaRouche and 12 associates on credit card fraud and obstruction of justice. The subsequent trial, described as an "extravaganza", was repeatedly delayed and ended in mistrial. Following the mistrial, a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Virginia, indicted LaRouche and six associates. After a short trial in 1988, LaRouche was convicted of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and tax evasion, and was sentenced to prison for fifteen years. He entered prison in 1989 and was paroled five years later. At the same trial, his associates received lesser sentences for mail fraud and conspiracy. In separate state trials in Virginia and New York, 13 associates received terms ranging from one month to 77 years. The Virginia state trials were described as the highest-profile cases that the state Attorney General's office had ever prosecuted. Fourteen states issued injunctions against LaRouche-related organizations. Three LaRouche-related organizations were forced into bankruptcy after failing to pay contempt of court fines. (Full article...) Image 7 Marjorie Cameron Parsons Kimmel (April 23, 1922 – July 24, 1995), who professionally used the mononym Cameron, was an American artist, poet, actress and occultist. A follower of Thelema, the new religious movement established by the English occultist Aleister Crowley, she was married to rocket pioneer and fellow Thelemite Jack Parsons. Born in Belle Plaine, Iowa, Cameron volunteered for service in the United States Navy during the Second World War, after which she settled in Pasadena, California. There she met Parsons, who believed her to be the "elemental" woman that he had invoked in the early stages of a series of sex magic rituals called the Babalon Working. They entered into a relationship and were married in 1946. Their relationship was often strained, although Parsons sparked her involvement in Thelema and occultism. After Parsons' death in an explosion at their home in 1952, Cameron came to suspect that her husband had been assassinated and began rituals to communicate with his spirit. Moving to Beaumont, she established a multi-racial occult group called The Children, which dedicated itself to sex magic rituals with the intent of producing mixed-race "moon children" who would be devoted to the god Horus. The group soon dissolved, largely because many of its members became concerned by Cameron's increasingly apocalyptic predictions. (Full article...) Image 8 August Meyszner wearing the rank of SS-Oberführer in 1938 August Edler von Meyszner (3 August 1886 – 24 January 1947) was an Austrian Gendarmerie officer, right-wing politician, and senior Ordnungspolizei (order police) officer who held the post of Higher SS and Police Leader in the German-occupied territory of Serbia from January 1942 to March 1944, during World War II. He has been described as one of Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler's most brutal subordinates. Meyszner began his career as an officer in the Gendarmerie, served on the Italian Front during World War I and reached the rank of Major der Polizei by 1921. He joined the Austrian Nazi Party in September 1925 and became a right-wing parliamentary deputy and provincial minister in the Austrian province of Styria in 1930. Due to his involvement with the Nazis, Meyszner was forcibly retired in 1933 and arrested in February 1934, but released after three months at the Wöllersdorf concentration camp. That July, he was rearrested following an attempted coup, but escaped police custody and fled to Nazi Germany, where he joined the Ordnungspolizei (Orpo) and then the Allgemeine SS. After police postings in Austria, Germany and occupied Norway, Himmler appointed Meyszner as Higher SS and Police Leader in Serbia in early 1942. He was one of few Orpo officers to be appointed to such a role. (Full article...) Image 9 Sir James Chadwick, CH, FRS (20 October 1891 – 24 July 1974) was a British physicist who was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of the neutron in 1932. In 1941, he wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report, which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts. He was the head of the British team that worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II. He was knighted in Britain in 1945 for his achievements in physics. Chadwick graduated from the Victoria University of Manchester in 1911, where he studied under Ernest Rutherford (known as the "father of nuclear physics"). At Manchester, he continued to study under Rutherford until he was awarded his MSc in 1913. The same year, Chadwick was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851. He elected to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger in Berlin. Using Geiger's recently developed Geiger counter, Chadwick was able to demonstrate that beta radiation produced a continuous spectrum, and not discrete lines as had been thought. Still in Germany when World War I broke out in Europe, he spent the next four years in the Ruhleben internment camp. (Full article...) Image 10 Billings Learned Hand (/?l??rn?d/ LURN-id; January 27, 1872 – August 18, 1961) was an American jurist, lawyer, and judicial philosopher. He served as a federal trial judge on the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York and later as an appellate judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Born and raised in Albany, New York, Hand majored in philosophy at Harvard College and graduated with honors from Harvard Law School. After a short career as a lawyer in Albany and New York City, he was appointed at the age of 37 as a Federal District Judge in Manhattan in 1909. The profession suited his detached and open-minded temperament, and his decisions soon won him a reputation for craftsmanship and authority. Between 1909 and 1914, under the influence of Herbert Croly's social theories, Hand supported New Nationalism. He ran unsuccessfully as the Progressive Party's candidate for Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals in 1913, but withdrew from active politics shortly afterwards. In 1924, President Calvin Coolidge promoted Hand to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which he went on to lead as the Senior Circuit Judge (later retitled Chief Judge) from 1939 until his semi-retirement in 1951. Scholars have recognized the Second Circuit under Hand as one of the finest appeals courts in the country's history. Friends and admirers often lobbied for Hand's promotion to the Supreme Court, but circumstances and his political past conspired against his appointment. (Full article...) Image 11 Margaret Lea Houston, c. 1839 Margaret Lea Houston (April 11, 1819 – December 3, 1867) was First Lady of the Republic of Texas during her husband Sam Houston's second term as President of the Republic of Texas. They met following the first of his two non-consecutive terms as the Republic's president, and married when he was a representative in the Congress of the Republic of Texas. She was his third wife, remaining with him until his death. She came from a close-knit family in Alabama, many of whom also moved to Texas when she married the man who was an accomplished politician in both Tennessee and Texas, and who had won the Battle of San Jacinto during the Texas Revolution. The couple had eight children, and she gave birth to most of them while he was away attending to politics. Her mother Nancy Lea was a constant in their lives, helping with the children, managing the household help, and always providing either financial assistance or temporary housing. With the help of her extended family in Texas, Margaret convinced her husband to give up both alcohol and profane language. He believed his wife to be an exemplary woman of faith and, under her influence, converted to the Baptist denomination, after he had many years earlier been baptized a Catholic in Nacogdoches, Texas. (Full article...) Image 12 Joseph Havens Richards SJ (born Havens Cowles Richards; November 8, 1851 – June 9, 1923) was an American Catholic priest and Jesuit who became a prominent president of Georgetown University, where he instituted major reforms and significantly enhanced the quality and stature of the university. Born to a prominent Ohio family, his father was an Episcopal priest who controversially converted to Catholicism and had the infant Richards secretly baptized as a Catholic. Richards became the president of Georgetown University in 1888 and undertook significant construction, such as the completion of Healy Hall, which included work on Gaston Hall and Riggs Library, and the building of Dahlgren Chapel. Richards sought to transform Georgetown into a modern, comprehensive university. To that end, he bolstered the graduate programs, expanded the School of Medicine and Law School , established the Georgetown University Hospital, improved the astronomical observatory, and recruited prominent faculty. He also navigated tensions with the newly established Catholic University of America, which was located in the same city. Richards fought anti-Catholic discrimination by Ivy League universities, resulting in Harvard Law School admitting graduates of some Jesuit universities. (Full article...) Image 13 Turner in the 1890s Emma Louisa Turner or E L Turner FLS, FZS, HMBOU (9 June 1867 – 13 August 1940) was an English ornithologist and pioneering bird photographer. Turner took up photography at age 34, after meeting the wildlife photographer Richard Kearton. She joined the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) in 1901, and by 1904 she had started to give talks illustrated with her own photographic slides; by 1908, when aged 41, she was established as a professional lecturer. Turner spent part of each year in Norfolk, and her 1911 image of a nestling bittern in Norfolk was the first evidence of the species' return to the United Kingdom as a breeding bird after its local extinction in the late 19th century. She also travelled widely in the United Kingdom and abroad photographing birds. (Full article...) Image 14 Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd's name in Arabic calligraphy Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd al-Thaqafi (Arabic: ??????????? ???? ????? ??????? ????????????, al-Mukht?r ibn Ab? ?Ubayd al-Thaqaf?y; c. 622 – 3 April 687) was a pro-Alid revolutionary based in Kufa, who led a rebellion against the Umayyad Caliphate in 685 and ruled over most of Iraq for eighteen months during the Second Fitna. Born in Ta'if, Mukhtar moved to Iraq at a young age and grew up in Kufa. Following the death of Husayn ibn Ali, a grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, at the hands of the Umayyad army in the Battle of Karbala in 680, he allied with the rival caliph Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr in Mecca, but the alliance was short-lived. Mukhtar returned to Kufa where he declared Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, a son of caliph Ali (r. 656–661) and brother of Husayn, the mahdi and the imam, and called for the establishment of an Alid caliphate and retaliation for Husayn's killing. He took over Kufa in October 685, after expelling its Zubayrid governor, and later ordered the execution of those involved in the killing of Husayn. Hostile relations with Ibn al-Zubayr ultimately led to Mukhtar's death by the forces of the Zubayrid governor of Basra, Mus'ab ibn al-Zubayr, following a four-month siege. (Full article...) Image 15 Engraving of Percy Thomas Percy (c.?1560 – 8 November 1605) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605. A tall, physically impressive man, little is known of his early life beyond his matriculation in 1579 at the University of Cambridge, and his marriage in 1591 to Martha Wright. In 1596 his second cousin once removed, Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland, appointed him constable of Alnwick Castle and made him responsible for the Percy family's northern estates. He served the earl in the Low Countries in about 1600–1601, and in the years before 1603 was his intermediary in a series of confidential communications with King James VI of Scotland. Following James's accession to the English throne in 1603, Percy became disenchanted with the new king, who he supposed had reneged on his promises of toleration for English Catholics. His meeting in June 1603 with Robert Catesby, a religious zealot similarly unimpressed with the new royal Stuart dynasty, led the following year to his joining Catesby's conspiracy to kill the king and his ministers by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder. Percy helped fund the group and secured the leases to certain properties in London, one of which was the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords, in which the gunpowder was finally placed. The conspirators also planned to instigate an uprising in the Midlands and to simultaneously kidnap James's daughter, Princess Elizabeth. Percy was to remain in London and secure the capture of her brother, Prince Henry. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Swedish painter, ceramist, designer, and writer Tyra Lundgren was one of the most versatile artists of the 20th century? ... that Francis Dzierozynski's dispute with Archbishop Ambrose Maréchal over land ownership in Maryland escalated to involve Pope Pius VII and two U.S. secretaries of state? ... that Swedish actor Christopher Wollter started his career as a teenage reporter for the SVT children's television show Barnjournalen? ... that after surviving the Holocaust, writer Trudi Birger moved to Israel with her family and founded a non-profit dental clinic? ... that President Barack Obama celebrated his 50th birthday by playing basketball with Shane Battier, LeBron James, Magic Johnson, Maya Moore, Alonzo Mourning, Joakim Noah, Chris Paul, and Derrick Rose? ... that the 2017 Bishop Maginn High School baseball team largely consisted of Karen refugees? ... that Flying Apsaras Award winner Tian Chengren worked as an actor until the age of 92? ... that three members of the Harrison family of Virginia served as President of the United States? ... that at the age of 12, the Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse became the youngest ever Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo Calf Pipe and Bundle? ... that Ugandan president Idi Amin reportedly shot dead the leader of the Arube uprising when the latter tried to arrest him? ... that Swedish writer Annie Åkerhielm was an active campaigner against women's suffrage and democracy? ... that a line from the 1899 poem "Sympathy" provided the title for Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 2Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 3James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 4A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 5Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 6John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 7Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 8Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Vincent van GoghPainting credit: John Russell Vincent van Gogh is an oil-on-canvas portrait by Australian painter John Russell, dated 1886. It depicts Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, who became lifelong friends with Russell after meeting him at Fernand Cormon's atelier in Paris, which they both attended. Painted in a realist and academic manner, the portrait shows hints of the impressionist techniques with which they began experimenting in the latter half of the 1880s. It is the earliest of three portraits painted of Van Gogh by his contemporaries, the other two being Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887) and Paul Gauguin's The Painter of Sunflowers (1888). Van Gogh seems to have been particularly attached to Russell's portrait, which Russell gifted to him as a mark of their friendship. The painting passed from Van Gogh to his brother Theo and then to their family; it is now in the collection of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. More selected portraits Image 2 Jean-Baptiste CarpeauxImage credit: The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux was a 19th-century French sculptor and painter who sought to inject movement and spontaneity into his works. This engraving, done to commemorate him after his death, shows his sculpture Flore below him, and others of his works above. In his time, some of his works, particularly La Danse, were criticised as indecent, but today his sculptures are exhibited in major museums of art worldwide. More selected portraits Image 3 Walt WhitmanPhotograph: George C. Cox; restoration: Adam Cuerden Walt Whitman (1819–1892) was an American poet, essayist and journalist. A humanist, he was a part of the transition between transcendentalism and realism, incorporating both views in his works. Whitman is among the most influential poets in the American canon, often called the father of free verse. His work was very controversial in its time, particularly his poetry collection Leaves of Grass (first published in 1855, but continuously revised until Whitman's death), which was described as obscene for its overt sexuality. More selected portraits Image 4 Pedro II of BrazilPhoto: Mathew Brady/Levin Corbin Handy Emperor of Brazil Pedro II was the second and last ruler of the Empire of Brazil, reigning for over 58 years. Born in Rio de Janeiro, his father Pedro I's abrupt abdication and flight to Europe in 1831 left him as Emperor at the age of five. Inheriting an Empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II turned Brazil into an emerging power in the international arena. On November 15, 1889, he was overthrown in a coup d'état by a clique of military leaders who declared Brazil a republic. However, he had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support, and did not support any attempt to restore the monarchy. More selected portraits Image 5 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 6 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. More selected portraits Image 7 Robert William ThomsonImage credit: Illustrated London News The obituary of Robert William Thomson as it appeared in the Illustrated London News on 29 March 1873. Thomson was the inventor of the pneumatic tyre, the elliptic rotary steam engine and locomotive traction engine, the portable steam crane, and numerous other inventions. The obituary preceding his is for Evelyn Denison, 1st Viscount Ossington. More selected portraits Image 8 Mark RuttePhoto: Nick van Ormondt Mark Rutte is (as of 2011) the incumbent Prime Minister of the Netherlands. He has been the leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) party since 2006. In the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in their occupying 31 of the 150 seats in the House of Representatives. When he was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal Prime Minister in the Netherlands in 92 years. More selected portraits Image 9 Louis PasteurPhotograph: Nadar; restoration: Chris Woodrich Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) was a French chemist and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation and pasteurization. He reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His medical discoveries provided direct support for the germ theory of disease and its application in clinical medicine. Together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch, he is regarded as one of the three main founders of bacteriology. More selected portraits Image 10 Alexz JohnsonPhoto: Epitome Pictures Alexz Johnson (b. 1986) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and actress, best known for roles as Jude Harrison in the CTV series Instant Star (character shown here), Annie Thelan in the Disney Channel series So Weird, and as Erin Ulmer in the 2006 horror film Final Destination 3. Her album Voodoo was released in 2010. More selected portraits Image 11 Wayne GretzkyPhoto credit: Håkan Dahlström Ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky, as a member of the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL) in 1997. Gretzky, nicknamed "The Great One", is widely considered the best hockey player of all time. Upon his retirement in 1999, he held forty regular-season records, fifteen playoff records, and six All-Star records. He is the only NHL player to total over 200 points in one season—a feat he accomplished four times. In addition, he tallied over 100 points in 15 NHL seasons, 13 of them consecutively. He is the only player to have his number (99) officially retired by the NHL for all teams. More selected portraits Image 12 Enoch PowellPhotograph: Allan Warren Enoch Powell (1912–98), a professor of Ancient Greek by age 25 and brigadier during World War II, took up politics in the late 1940s and in the 1960s was selected for several cabinet positions. In 1968, he gave the "Rivers of Blood" speech about the dangers of immigration to the United Kingdom and of proposed anti-discrimination legislation. More selected portraits Image 13 K. T. ThomasPhotograph credit: Augustus Binu K. T. Thomas (born 30 January 1937) is a former judge of the Supreme Court of India, known for his strong opinions on Indian socio-political matters. He was selected as a district and sessions judge in 1977, and became a judge of the Kerala High Court in 1985. A decade later, he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court, on which he served until retiring in 2002. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Indian government in 2007 for services in the field of social affairs. More selected portraits Image 14 Nataliya GotsiyPhoto credit: Peter Duhon Ukrainian fashion model Nataliya Gotsiy modeling for Cynthia Rowley, Spring 2007 New York Fashion Week. She was the winner of the Ford Supermodel of the World 2004 search. She has appeared on the cover of French Elle and Italian Marie Claire and modeled for Behnaz Sarafpour, Christian Lacroix, Diane von Furstenberg, Dior, Dolce & Gabbana, Dries van Noten, Gucci, Oscar de la Renta, Valentino, and Vivienne Westwood, among others. More selected portraits Image 15 Alice PaulPhotograph credit: Harris & Ewing; restored by Adam Cuerden Alice Paul was an American suffragist, feminist, and women's-rights activist, and one of the main leaders and strategists of the campaign for the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits sex discrimination in the right to vote. Along with Lucy Burns and others, she strategized events such as the Woman Suffrage Procession and the Silent Sentinels as part of the successful campaign that resulted in the amendment's passage on August 18, 1920. This photograph of Paul was taken in 1915 by the Harris & Ewing photographic studio in Washington, D.C. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 24 Births 1632 - Baruch Spinoza, Dutch philosopher (d. 1677) 1784 - Zachary Taylor, 12th President of the United States (d. 1850) (pictured) 1849 - Frances Hodgson Burnett, British-born author (d. 1924) 1853 - Bat Masterson, American gunfighter (d. 1921) 1925 - William F. Buckley Jr., American writer (d. 2008) 1946 - Ted Bundy, American serial killer (d. 1989) Deaths 1957 - Diego Rivera, Mexican painter (b. 1886) 1963 - Lee Harvey Oswald, accused assassin of John F. Kennedy (b. 1939) 1991 - Freddie Mercury, Zanzibar-born singer (Queen) (b. 1946) 2005 - Pat Morita, American actor (b. 1932) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 24 November 2021 – Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) 22 November 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) 21 November 2021 – 2021 Chilean general election Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Updated: 21:33, 24 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "Not one of us knows what effect his life produces, and what he gives to others; that is hidden from us and must remain so, though we are often allowed to see some little fraction of it, so that we may not lose courage." — Albert Schweitzer In The Spiritual Life, 1947 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Harvey Bernard Milk (May 22, 1930 – November 27, 1978) was an American politician and the first openly gay elected official in the history of California, where he was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors. Although he was the most pro-LGBT politician in the United States at the time, politics and activism were not his early interests; he was neither open about his sexuality nor civically active until he was 40, after his experiences in the counterculture movement of the 1960s. In 1972, Milk moved from New York City to the Castro District of San Francisco amid a migration of gay and bisexual men. He took advantage of the growing political and economic power of the neighborhood to promote his interests and unsuccessfully ran three times for political office. Milk's theatrical campaigns earned him increasing popularity, and in 1977 he won a seat as a city supervisor. His election was made possible by a key component of a shift in San Francisco politics. (Full article...) Image 2 Shepard in 1971 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. (November 18, 1923 – July 21, 1998) was an American astronaut, naval aviator, test pilot, and businessman. In 1961, he became the second person and the first American to travel into space, and in 1971, he walked on the Moon. A graduate of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Shepard saw action with the surface navy during World War II. He became a naval aviator in 1946, and a test pilot in 1950. He was selected as one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts in 1959, and in May 1961 he made the first crewed Project Mercury flight, Mercury-Redstone 3, in a spacecraft he named Freedom 7. His craft entered space, but was not capable of achieving orbit. He became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space, and the first space traveler to manually control the orientation of his craft. In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission. He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B Freedom 7 II in honor of his first spacecraft, but the mission was canceled. (Full article...) Image 3 Jason Sendwe (1917 – 19 June 1964) was a Congolese politician and a leader of the Association Générale des Baluba du Katanga (BALUBAKAT) party. He served as Second Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Republic of the Congo) from August 1961 until January 1963, and as President of the Province of North Katanga from September 1963 until his death, with a brief interruption. Sendwe was born in 1917 in Mwanya, Kabongo Territory, Belgian Congo, to a Baluba family. He was educated in Methodist schools and nursing institutions. Unable to become a doctor due to a lack of medical schools in the Congo, he found work as a minister, teacher, and nurse. He became involved in several cultural organisations, and in 1957 founded BALUBAKAT to fight for the interests of the Baluba. He espoused nationalism and believed that the Congo should remain a united country after Belgian rule. In May 1960, shortly before the country's independence, he was elected to the newly constituted Chamber of Deputies. Sendwe sought to obtain control over the government of Katanga Province, but lost a power struggle against his rival, Moïse Tshombe, and the Confédération des associations tribales du Katanga (CONAKAT) party. Regardless, Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba nominated him for the office of State Commissioner for Katanga. (Full article...) Image 4 Hattie Jacques (/d?e?ks/; born Josephine Edwina Jaques; 7 February 1922 – 6 October 1980) was an English comedy actress of stage, radio and screen. She is best known as a regular of the Carry On films, where she typically played strict, no-nonsense characters, but was also a prolific television and radio performer. Jacques started her career in 1944 with an appearance at the Players' Theatre in London, but came to national prominence through her appearances on three highly popular radio series on the BBC: with Tommy Handley on It's That Man Again; with ventriloquist Peter Brough on Educating Archie; and then with Tony Hancock on Hancock's Half Hour. After the Second World War Jacques made her cinematic debut in Green for Danger (1946), in which she had a brief, uncredited role. From 1958 to 1974 she appeared in 14 Carry On films, playing various roles including the formidable hospital matron. On television she had a long professional partnership with Eric Sykes, with whom she co-starred in his long-running series Sykes and Sykes and a.... The role endeared her to the public and the two became staples of British television. (Full article...) Image 5 Leslie Groves, pictured here as a major general. Lieutenant General Leslie Richard Groves Jr. (17 August 1896 – 13 July 1970) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who oversaw the construction of the Pentagon and directed the Manhattan Project, a top secret research project that developed the atomic bomb during World War II. The son of a U.S. Army chaplain, Groves lived at various Army posts during his childhood. In 1918, he graduated fourth in his class at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and was commissioned into the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. In 1929, he went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition to conduct a survey for the Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal. Following the 1931 earthquake, Groves took over Managua's water supply system, for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit. He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1935 and 1936; and the Army War College in 1938 and 1939, after which he was posted to the War Department General Staff. Groves developed "a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty" and in 1940 he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General, tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress. In August 1941, he was appointed to create the gigantic office complex for the War Department's 40,000 staff that would ultimately become the Pentagon. (Full article...) Image 6 The LaRouche criminal trials in the mid-1980s stemmed from federal and state investigations into the activities of American political activist Lyndon LaRouche and members of his movement. They were charged with conspiring to commit fraud and soliciting loans they had no intention of repaying. LaRouche and his supporters disputed the charges, claiming the trials were politically motivated. In 1986, hundreds of state and federal officers raided LaRouche offices in Virginia and Massachusetts. A federal grand jury in Boston, Massachusetts, indicted LaRouche and 12 associates on credit card fraud and obstruction of justice. The subsequent trial, described as an "extravaganza", was repeatedly delayed and ended in mistrial. Following the mistrial, a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Virginia, indicted LaRouche and six associates. After a short trial in 1988, LaRouche was convicted of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and tax evasion, and was sentenced to prison for fifteen years. He entered prison in 1989 and was paroled five years later. At the same trial, his associates received lesser sentences for mail fraud and conspiracy. In separate state trials in Virginia and New York, 13 associates received terms ranging from one month to 77 years. The Virginia state trials were described as the highest-profile cases that the state Attorney General's office had ever prosecuted. Fourteen states issued injunctions against LaRouche-related organizations. Three LaRouche-related organizations were forced into bankruptcy after failing to pay contempt of court fines. (Full article...) Image 7 Marjorie Cameron Parsons Kimmel (April 23, 1922 – July 24, 1995), who professionally used the mononym Cameron, was an American artist, poet, actress and occultist. A follower of Thelema, the new religious movement established by the English occultist Aleister Crowley, she was married to rocket pioneer and fellow Thelemite Jack Parsons. Born in Belle Plaine, Iowa, Cameron volunteered for service in the United States Navy during the Second World War, after which she settled in Pasadena, California. There she met Parsons, who believed her to be the "elemental" woman that he had invoked in the early stages of a series of sex magic rituals called the Babalon Working. They entered into a relationship and were married in 1946. Their relationship was often strained, although Parsons sparked her involvement in Thelema and occultism. After Parsons' death in an explosion at their home in 1952, Cameron came to suspect that her husband had been assassinated and began rituals to communicate with his spirit. Moving to Beaumont, she established a multi-racial occult group called The Children, which dedicated itself to sex magic rituals with the intent of producing mixed-race "moon children" who would be devoted to the god Horus. The group soon dissolved, largely because many of its members became concerned by Cameron's increasingly apocalyptic predictions. (Full article...) Image 8 August Meyszner wearing the rank of SS-Oberführer in 1938 August Edler von Meyszner (3 August 1886 – 24 January 1947) was an Austrian Gendarmerie officer, right-wing politician, and senior Ordnungspolizei (order police) officer who held the post of Higher SS and Police Leader in the German-occupied territory of Serbia from January 1942 to March 1944, during World War II. He has been described as one of Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler's most brutal subordinates. Meyszner began his career as an officer in the Gendarmerie, served on the Italian Front during World War I and reached the rank of Major der Polizei by 1921. He joined the Austrian Nazi Party in September 1925 and became a right-wing parliamentary deputy and provincial minister in the Austrian province of Styria in 1930. Due to his involvement with the Nazis, Meyszner was forcibly retired in 1933 and arrested in February 1934, but released after three months at the Wöllersdorf concentration camp. That July, he was rearrested following an attempted coup, but escaped police custody and fled to Nazi Germany, where he joined the Ordnungspolizei (Orpo) and then the Allgemeine SS. After police postings in Austria, Germany and occupied Norway, Himmler appointed Meyszner as Higher SS and Police Leader in Serbia in early 1942. He was one of few Orpo officers to be appointed to such a role. (Full article...) Image 9 Sir James Chadwick, CH, FRS (20 October 1891 – 24 July 1974) was a British physicist who was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of the neutron in 1932. In 1941, he wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report, which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts. He was the head of the British team that worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II. He was knighted in Britain in 1945 for his achievements in physics. Chadwick graduated from the Victoria University of Manchester in 1911, where he studied under Ernest Rutherford (known as the "father of nuclear physics"). At Manchester, he continued to study under Rutherford until he was awarded his MSc in 1913. The same year, Chadwick was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851. He elected to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger in Berlin. Using Geiger's recently developed Geiger counter, Chadwick was able to demonstrate that beta radiation produced a continuous spectrum, and not discrete lines as had been thought. Still in Germany when World War I broke out in Europe, he spent the next four years in the Ruhleben internment camp. (Full article...) Image 10 Billings Learned Hand (/?l??rn?d/ LURN-id; January 27, 1872 – August 18, 1961) was an American jurist, lawyer, and judicial philosopher. He served as a federal trial judge on the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York and later as an appellate judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Born and raised in Albany, New York, Hand majored in philosophy at Harvard College and graduated with honors from Harvard Law School. After a short career as a lawyer in Albany and New York City, he was appointed at the age of 37 as a Federal District Judge in Manhattan in 1909. The profession suited his detached and open-minded temperament, and his decisions soon won him a reputation for craftsmanship and authority. Between 1909 and 1914, under the influence of Herbert Croly's social theories, Hand supported New Nationalism. He ran unsuccessfully as the Progressive Party's candidate for Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals in 1913, but withdrew from active politics shortly afterwards. In 1924, President Calvin Coolidge promoted Hand to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which he went on to lead as the Senior Circuit Judge (later retitled Chief Judge) from 1939 until his semi-retirement in 1951. Scholars have recognized the Second Circuit under Hand as one of the finest appeals courts in the country's history. Friends and admirers often lobbied for Hand's promotion to the Supreme Court, but circumstances and his political past conspired against his appointment. (Full article...) Image 11 Margaret Lea Houston, c. 1839 Margaret Lea Houston (April 11, 1819 – December 3, 1867) was First Lady of the Republic of Texas during her husband Sam Houston's second term as President of the Republic of Texas. They met following the first of his two non-consecutive terms as the Republic's president, and married when he was a representative in the Congress of the Republic of Texas. She was his third wife, remaining with him until his death. She came from a close-knit family in Alabama, many of whom also moved to Texas when she married the man who was an accomplished politician in both Tennessee and Texas, and who had won the Battle of San Jacinto during the Texas Revolution. The couple had eight children, and she gave birth to most of them while he was away attending to politics. Her mother Nancy Lea was a constant in their lives, helping with the children, managing the household help, and always providing either financial assistance or temporary housing. With the help of her extended family in Texas, Margaret convinced her husband to give up both alcohol and profane language. He believed his wife to be an exemplary woman of faith and, under her influence, converted to the Baptist denomination, after he had many years earlier been baptized a Catholic in Nacogdoches, Texas. (Full article...) Image 12 Joseph Havens Richards SJ (born Havens Cowles Richards; November 8, 1851 – June 9, 1923) was an American Catholic priest and Jesuit who became a prominent president of Georgetown University, where he instituted major reforms and significantly enhanced the quality and stature of the university. Born to a prominent Ohio family, his father was an Episcopal priest who controversially converted to Catholicism and had the infant Richards secretly baptized as a Catholic. Richards became the president of Georgetown University in 1888 and undertook significant construction, such as the completion of Healy Hall, which included work on Gaston Hall and Riggs Library, and the building of Dahlgren Chapel. Richards sought to transform Georgetown into a modern, comprehensive university. To that end, he bolstered the graduate programs, expanded the School of Medicine and Law School , established the Georgetown University Hospital, improved the astronomical observatory, and recruited prominent faculty. He also navigated tensions with the newly established Catholic University of America, which was located in the same city. Richards fought anti-Catholic discrimination by Ivy League universities, resulting in Harvard Law School admitting graduates of some Jesuit universities. (Full article...) Image 13 Turner in the 1890s Emma Louisa Turner or E L Turner FLS, FZS, HMBOU (9 June 1867 – 13 August 1940) was an English ornithologist and pioneering bird photographer. Turner took up photography at age 34, after meeting the wildlife photographer Richard Kearton. She joined the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) in 1901, and by 1904 she had started to give talks illustrated with her own photographic slides; by 1908, when aged 41, she was established as a professional lecturer. Turner spent part of each year in Norfolk, and her 1911 image of a nestling bittern in Norfolk was the first evidence of the species' return to the United Kingdom as a breeding bird after its local extinction in the late 19th century. She also travelled widely in the United Kingdom and abroad photographing birds. (Full article...) Image 14 Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd's name in Arabic calligraphy Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd al-Thaqafi (Arabic: ??????????? ???? ????? ??????? ????????????, al-Mukht?r ibn Ab? ?Ubayd al-Thaqaf?y; c. 622 – 3 April 687) was a pro-Alid revolutionary based in Kufa, who led a rebellion against the Umayyad Caliphate in 685 and ruled over most of Iraq for eighteen months during the Second Fitna. Born in Ta'if, Mukhtar moved to Iraq at a young age and grew up in Kufa. Following the death of Husayn ibn Ali, a grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, at the hands of the Umayyad army in the Battle of Karbala in 680, he allied with the rival caliph Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr in Mecca, but the alliance was short-lived. Mukhtar returned to Kufa where he declared Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, a son of caliph Ali (r. 656–661) and brother of Husayn, the mahdi and the imam, and called for the establishment of an Alid caliphate and retaliation for Husayn's killing. He took over Kufa in October 685, after expelling its Zubayrid governor, and later ordered the execution of those involved in the killing of Husayn. Hostile relations with Ibn al-Zubayr ultimately led to Mukhtar's death by the forces of the Zubayrid governor of Basra, Mus'ab ibn al-Zubayr, following a four-month siege. (Full article...) Image 15 Engraving of Percy Thomas Percy (c.?1560 – 8 November 1605) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605. A tall, physically impressive man, little is known of his early life beyond his matriculation in 1579 at the University of Cambridge, and his marriage in 1591 to Martha Wright. In 1596 his second cousin once removed, Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland, appointed him constable of Alnwick Castle and made him responsible for the Percy family's northern estates. He served the earl in the Low Countries in about 1600–1601, and in the years before 1603 was his intermediary in a series of confidential communications with King James VI of Scotland. Following James's accession to the English throne in 1603, Percy became disenchanted with the new king, who he supposed had reneged on his promises of toleration for English Catholics. His meeting in June 1603 with Robert Catesby, a religious zealot similarly unimpressed with the new royal Stuart dynasty, led the following year to his joining Catesby's conspiracy to kill the king and his ministers by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder. Percy helped fund the group and secured the leases to certain properties in London, one of which was the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords, in which the gunpowder was finally placed. The conspirators also planned to instigate an uprising in the Midlands and to simultaneously kidnap James's daughter, Princess Elizabeth. Percy was to remain in London and secure the capture of her brother, Prince Henry. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Swedish painter, ceramist, designer, and writer Tyra Lundgren was one of the most versatile artists of the 20th century? ... that Francis Dzierozynski's dispute with Archbishop Ambrose Maréchal over land ownership in Maryland escalated to involve Pope Pius VII and two U.S. secretaries of state? ... that Swedish actor Christopher Wollter started his career as a teenage reporter for the SVT children's television show Barnjournalen? ... that after surviving the Holocaust, writer Trudi Birger moved to Israel with her family and founded a non-profit dental clinic? ... that President Barack Obama celebrated his 50th birthday by playing basketball with Shane Battier, LeBron James, Magic Johnson, Maya Moore, Alonzo Mourning, Joakim Noah, Chris Paul, and Derrick Rose? ... that the 2017 Bishop Maginn High School baseball team largely consisted of Karen refugees? ... that Flying Apsaras Award winner Tian Chengren worked as an actor until the age of 92? ... that three members of the Harrison family of Virginia served as President of the United States? ... that at the age of 12, the Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse became the youngest ever Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo Calf Pipe and Bundle? ... that Ugandan president Idi Amin reportedly shot dead the leader of the Arube uprising when the latter tried to arrest him? ... that Swedish writer Annie Åkerhielm was an active campaigner against women's suffrage and democracy? ... that a line from the 1899 poem "Sympathy" provided the title for Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 2Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 3James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 4A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 5Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 6John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 7Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 8Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Vincent van GoghPainting credit: John Russell Vincent van Gogh is an oil-on-canvas portrait by Australian painter John Russell, dated 1886. It depicts Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, who became lifelong friends with Russell after meeting him at Fernand Cormon's atelier in Paris, which they both attended. Painted in a realist and academic manner, the portrait shows hints of the impressionist techniques with which they began experimenting in the latter half of the 1880s. It is the earliest of three portraits painted of Van Gogh by his contemporaries, the other two being Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887) and Paul Gauguin's The Painter of Sunflowers (1888). Van Gogh seems to have been particularly attached to Russell's portrait, which Russell gifted to him as a mark of their friendship. The painting passed from Van Gogh to his brother Theo and then to their family; it is now in the collection of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. More selected portraits Image 2 Jean-Baptiste CarpeauxImage credit: The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux was a 19th-century French sculptor and painter who sought to inject movement and spontaneity into his works. This engraving, done to commemorate him after his death, shows his sculpture Flore below him, and others of his works above. In his time, some of his works, particularly La Danse, were criticised as indecent, but today his sculptures are exhibited in major museums of art worldwide. More selected portraits Image 3 Walt WhitmanPhotograph: George C. Cox; restoration: Adam Cuerden Walt Whitman (1819–1892) was an American poet, essayist and journalist. A humanist, he was a part of the transition between transcendentalism and realism, incorporating both views in his works. Whitman is among the most influential poets in the American canon, often called the father of free verse. His work was very controversial in its time, particularly his poetry collection Leaves of Grass (first published in 1855, but continuously revised until Whitman's death), which was described as obscene for its overt sexuality. More selected portraits Image 4 Pedro II of BrazilPhoto: Mathew Brady/Levin Corbin Handy Emperor of Brazil Pedro II was the second and last ruler of the Empire of Brazil, reigning for over 58 years. Born in Rio de Janeiro, his father Pedro I's abrupt abdication and flight to Europe in 1831 left him as Emperor at the age of five. Inheriting an Empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II turned Brazil into an emerging power in the international arena. On November 15, 1889, he was overthrown in a coup d'état by a clique of military leaders who declared Brazil a republic. However, he had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support, and did not support any attempt to restore the monarchy. More selected portraits Image 5 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 6 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. More selected portraits Image 7 Robert William ThomsonImage credit: Illustrated London News The obituary of Robert William Thomson as it appeared in the Illustrated London News on 29 March 1873. Thomson was the inventor of the pneumatic tyre, the elliptic rotary steam engine and locomotive traction engine, the portable steam crane, and numerous other inventions. The obituary preceding his is for Evelyn Denison, 1st Viscount Ossington. More selected portraits Image 8 Mark RuttePhoto: Nick van Ormondt Mark Rutte is (as of 2011) the incumbent Prime Minister of the Netherlands. He has been the leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) party since 2006. In the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in their occupying 31 of the 150 seats in the House of Representatives. When he was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal Prime Minister in the Netherlands in 92 years. More selected portraits Image 9 Louis PasteurPhotograph: Nadar; restoration: Chris Woodrich Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) was a French chemist and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation and pasteurization. He reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His medical discoveries provided direct support for the germ theory of disease and its application in clinical medicine. Together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch, he is regarded as one of the three main founders of bacteriology. More selected portraits Image 10 Alexz JohnsonPhoto: Epitome Pictures Alexz Johnson (b. 1986) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and actress, best known for roles as Jude Harrison in the CTV series Instant Star (character shown here), Annie Thelan in the Disney Channel series So Weird, and as Erin Ulmer in the 2006 horror film Final Destination 3. Her album Voodoo was released in 2010. More selected portraits Image 11 Wayne GretzkyPhoto credit: Håkan Dahlström Ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky, as a member of the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL) in 1997. Gretzky, nicknamed "The Great One", is widely considered the best hockey player of all time. Upon his retirement in 1999, he held forty regular-season records, fifteen playoff records, and six All-Star records. He is the only NHL player to total over 200 points in one season—a feat he accomplished four times. In addition, he tallied over 100 points in 15 NHL seasons, 13 of them consecutively. He is the only player to have his number (99) officially retired by the NHL for all teams. More selected portraits Image 12 Enoch PowellPhotograph: Allan Warren Enoch Powell (1912–98), a professor of Ancient Greek by age 25 and brigadier during World War II, took up politics in the late 1940s and in the 1960s was selected for several cabinet positions. In 1968, he gave the "Rivers of Blood" speech about the dangers of immigration to the United Kingdom and of proposed anti-discrimination legislation. More selected portraits Image 13 K. T. ThomasPhotograph credit: Augustus Binu K. T. Thomas (born 30 January 1937) is a former judge of the Supreme Court of India, known for his strong opinions on Indian socio-political matters. He was selected as a district and sessions judge in 1977, and became a judge of the Kerala High Court in 1985. A decade later, he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court, on which he served until retiring in 2002. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Indian government in 2007 for services in the field of social affairs. More selected portraits Image 14 Nataliya GotsiyPhoto credit: Peter Duhon Ukrainian fashion model Nataliya Gotsiy modeling for Cynthia Rowley, Spring 2007 New York Fashion Week. She was the winner of the Ford Supermodel of the World 2004 search. She has appeared on the cover of French Elle and Italian Marie Claire and modeled for Behnaz Sarafpour, Christian Lacroix, Diane von Furstenberg, Dior, Dolce & Gabbana, Dries van Noten, Gucci, Oscar de la Renta, Valentino, and Vivienne Westwood, among others. More selected portraits Image 15 Alice PaulPhotograph credit: Harris & Ewing; restored by Adam Cuerden Alice Paul was an American suffragist, feminist, and women's-rights activist, and one of the main leaders and strategists of the campaign for the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits sex discrimination in the right to vote. Along with Lucy Burns and others, she strategized events such as the Woman Suffrage Procession and the Silent Sentinels as part of the successful campaign that resulted in the amendment's passage on August 18, 1920. This photograph of Paul was taken in 1915 by the Harris & Ewing photographic studio in Washington, D.C. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 24 Births 1632 - Baruch Spinoza, Dutch philosopher (d. 1677) 1784 - Zachary Taylor, 12th President of the United States (d. 1850) (pictured) 1849 - Frances Hodgson Burnett, British-born author (d. 1924) 1853 - Bat Masterson, American gunfighter (d. 1921) 1925 - William F. Buckley Jr., American writer (d. 2008) 1946 - Ted Bundy, American serial killer (d. 1989) Deaths 1957 - Diego Rivera, Mexican painter (b. 1886) 1963 - Lee Harvey Oswald, accused assassin of John F. Kennedy (b. 1939) 1991 - Freddie Mercury, Zanzibar-born singer (Queen) (b. 1946) 2005 - Pat Morita, American actor (b. 1932) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 24 November 2021 – Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) 22 November 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) 21 November 2021 – 2021 Chilean general election Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Updated: 21:33, 24 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "Not one of us knows what effect his life produces, and what he gives to others; that is hidden from us and must remain so, though we are often allowed to see some little fraction of it, so that we may not lose courage." — Albert Schweitzer In The Spiritual Life, 1947 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Harvey Bernard Milk (May 22, 1930 – November 27, 1978) was an American politician and the first openly gay elected official in the history of California, where he was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors. Although he was the most pro-LGBT politician in the United States at the time, politics and activism were not his early interests; he was neither open about his sexuality nor civically active until he was 40, after his experiences in the counterculture movement of the 1960s. In 1972, Milk moved from New York City to the Castro District of San Francisco amid a migration of gay and bisexual men. He took advantage of the growing political and economic power of the neighborhood to promote his interests and unsuccessfully ran three times for political office. Milk's theatrical campaigns earned him increasing popularity, and in 1977 he won a seat as a city supervisor. His election was made possible by a key component of a shift in San Francisco politics. (Full article...) Image 2 Shepard in 1971 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. (November 18, 1923 – July 21, 1998) was an American astronaut, naval aviator, test pilot, and businessman. In 1961, he became the second person and the first American to travel into space, and in 1971, he walked on the Moon. A graduate of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Shepard saw action with the surface navy during World War II. He became a naval aviator in 1946, and a test pilot in 1950. He was selected as one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts in 1959, and in May 1961 he made the first crewed Project Mercury flight, Mercury-Redstone 3, in a spacecraft he named Freedom 7. His craft entered space, but was not capable of achieving orbit. He became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space, and the first space traveler to manually control the orientation of his craft. In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission. He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B Freedom 7 II in honor of his first spacecraft, but the mission was canceled. (Full article...) Image 3 Jason Sendwe (1917 – 19 June 1964) was a Congolese politician and a leader of the Association Générale des Baluba du Katanga (BALUBAKAT) party. He served as Second Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Republic of the Congo) from August 1961 until January 1963, and as President of the Province of North Katanga from September 1963 until his death, with a brief interruption. Sendwe was born in 1917 in Mwanya, Kabongo Territory, Belgian Congo, to a Baluba family. He was educated in Methodist schools and nursing institutions. Unable to become a doctor due to a lack of medical schools in the Congo, he found work as a minister, teacher, and nurse. He became involved in several cultural organisations, and in 1957 founded BALUBAKAT to fight for the interests of the Baluba. He espoused nationalism and believed that the Congo should remain a united country after Belgian rule. In May 1960, shortly before the country's independence, he was elected to the newly constituted Chamber of Deputies. Sendwe sought to obtain control over the government of Katanga Province, but lost a power struggle against his rival, Moïse Tshombe, and the Confédération des associations tribales du Katanga (CONAKAT) party. Regardless, Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba nominated him for the office of State Commissioner for Katanga. (Full article...) Image 4 Hattie Jacques (/d?e?ks/; born Josephine Edwina Jaques; 7 February 1922 – 6 October 1980) was an English comedy actress of stage, radio and screen. She is best known as a regular of the Carry On films, where she typically played strict, no-nonsense characters, but was also a prolific television and radio performer. Jacques started her career in 1944 with an appearance at the Players' Theatre in London, but came to national prominence through her appearances on three highly popular radio series on the BBC: with Tommy Handley on It's That Man Again; with ventriloquist Peter Brough on Educating Archie; and then with Tony Hancock on Hancock's Half Hour. After the Second World War Jacques made her cinematic debut in Green for Danger (1946), in which she had a brief, uncredited role. From 1958 to 1974 she appeared in 14 Carry On films, playing various roles including the formidable hospital matron. On television she had a long professional partnership with Eric Sykes, with whom she co-starred in his long-running series Sykes and Sykes and a.... The role endeared her to the public and the two became staples of British television. (Full article...) Image 5 Leslie Groves, pictured here as a major general. Lieutenant General Leslie Richard Groves Jr. (17 August 1896 – 13 July 1970) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who oversaw the construction of the Pentagon and directed the Manhattan Project, a top secret research project that developed the atomic bomb during World War II. The son of a U.S. Army chaplain, Groves lived at various Army posts during his childhood. In 1918, he graduated fourth in his class at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and was commissioned into the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. In 1929, he went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition to conduct a survey for the Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal. Following the 1931 earthquake, Groves took over Managua's water supply system, for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit. He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1935 and 1936; and the Army War College in 1938 and 1939, after which he was posted to the War Department General Staff. Groves developed "a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty" and in 1940 he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General, tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress. In August 1941, he was appointed to create the gigantic office complex for the War Department's 40,000 staff that would ultimately become the Pentagon. (Full article...) Image 6 The LaRouche criminal trials in the mid-1980s stemmed from federal and state investigations into the activities of American political activist Lyndon LaRouche and members of his movement. They were charged with conspiring to commit fraud and soliciting loans they had no intention of repaying. LaRouche and his supporters disputed the charges, claiming the trials were politically motivated. In 1986, hundreds of state and federal officers raided LaRouche offices in Virginia and Massachusetts. A federal grand jury in Boston, Massachusetts, indicted LaRouche and 12 associates on credit card fraud and obstruction of justice. The subsequent trial, described as an "extravaganza", was repeatedly delayed and ended in mistrial. Following the mistrial, a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Virginia, indicted LaRouche and six associates. After a short trial in 1988, LaRouche was convicted of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and tax evasion, and was sentenced to prison for fifteen years. He entered prison in 1989 and was paroled five years later. At the same trial, his associates received lesser sentences for mail fraud and conspiracy. In separate state trials in Virginia and New York, 13 associates received terms ranging from one month to 77 years. The Virginia state trials were described as the highest-profile cases that the state Attorney General's office had ever prosecuted. Fourteen states issued injunctions against LaRouche-related organizations. Three LaRouche-related organizations were forced into bankruptcy after failing to pay contempt of court fines. (Full article...) Image 7 Marjorie Cameron Parsons Kimmel (April 23, 1922 – July 24, 1995), who professionally used the mononym Cameron, was an American artist, poet, actress and occultist. A follower of Thelema, the new religious movement established by the English occultist Aleister Crowley, she was married to rocket pioneer and fellow Thelemite Jack Parsons. Born in Belle Plaine, Iowa, Cameron volunteered for service in the United States Navy during the Second World War, after which she settled in Pasadena, California. There she met Parsons, who believed her to be the "elemental" woman that he had invoked in the early stages of a series of sex magic rituals called the Babalon Working. They entered into a relationship and were married in 1946. Their relationship was often strained, although Parsons sparked her involvement in Thelema and occultism. After Parsons' death in an explosion at their home in 1952, Cameron came to suspect that her husband had been assassinated and began rituals to communicate with his spirit. Moving to Beaumont, she established a multi-racial occult group called The Children, which dedicated itself to sex magic rituals with the intent of producing mixed-race "moon children" who would be devoted to the god Horus. The group soon dissolved, largely because many of its members became concerned by Cameron's increasingly apocalyptic predictions. (Full article...) Image 8 August Meyszner wearing the rank of SS-Oberführer in 1938 August Edler von Meyszner (3 August 1886 – 24 January 1947) was an Austrian Gendarmerie officer, right-wing politician, and senior Ordnungspolizei (order police) officer who held the post of Higher SS and Police Leader in the German-occupied territory of Serbia from January 1942 to March 1944, during World War II. He has been described as one of Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler's most brutal subordinates. Meyszner began his career as an officer in the Gendarmerie, served on the Italian Front during World War I and reached the rank of Major der Polizei by 1921. He joined the Austrian Nazi Party in September 1925 and became a right-wing parliamentary deputy and provincial minister in the Austrian province of Styria in 1930. Due to his involvement with the Nazis, Meyszner was forcibly retired in 1933 and arrested in February 1934, but released after three months at the Wöllersdorf concentration camp. That July, he was rearrested following an attempted coup, but escaped police custody and fled to Nazi Germany, where he joined the Ordnungspolizei (Orpo) and then the Allgemeine SS. After police postings in Austria, Germany and occupied Norway, Himmler appointed Meyszner as Higher SS and Police Leader in Serbia in early 1942. He was one of few Orpo officers to be appointed to such a role. (Full article...) Image 9 Sir James Chadwick, CH, FRS (20 October 1891 – 24 July 1974) was a British physicist who was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of the neutron in 1932. In 1941, he wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report, which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts. He was the head of the British team that worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II. He was knighted in Britain in 1945 for his achievements in physics. Chadwick graduated from the Victoria University of Manchester in 1911, where he studied under Ernest Rutherford (known as the "father of nuclear physics"). At Manchester, he continued to study under Rutherford until he was awarded his MSc in 1913. The same year, Chadwick was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851. He elected to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger in Berlin. Using Geiger's recently developed Geiger counter, Chadwick was able to demonstrate that beta radiation produced a continuous spectrum, and not discrete lines as had been thought. Still in Germany when World War I broke out in Europe, he spent the next four years in the Ruhleben internment camp. (Full article...) Image 10 Billings Learned Hand (/?l??rn?d/ LURN-id; January 27, 1872 – August 18, 1961) was an American jurist, lawyer, and judicial philosopher. He served as a federal trial judge on the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York and later as an appellate judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Born and raised in Albany, New York, Hand majored in philosophy at Harvard College and graduated with honors from Harvard Law School. After a short career as a lawyer in Albany and New York City, he was appointed at the age of 37 as a Federal District Judge in Manhattan in 1909. The profession suited his detached and open-minded temperament, and his decisions soon won him a reputation for craftsmanship and authority. Between 1909 and 1914, under the influence of Herbert Croly's social theories, Hand supported New Nationalism. He ran unsuccessfully as the Progressive Party's candidate for Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals in 1913, but withdrew from active politics shortly afterwards. In 1924, President Calvin Coolidge promoted Hand to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which he went on to lead as the Senior Circuit Judge (later retitled Chief Judge) from 1939 until his semi-retirement in 1951. Scholars have recognized the Second Circuit under Hand as one of the finest appeals courts in the country's history. Friends and admirers often lobbied for Hand's promotion to the Supreme Court, but circumstances and his political past conspired against his appointment. (Full article...) Image 11 Margaret Lea Houston, c. 1839 Margaret Lea Houston (April 11, 1819 – December 3, 1867) was First Lady of the Republic of Texas during her husband Sam Houston's second term as President of the Republic of Texas. They met following the first of his two non-consecutive terms as the Republic's president, and married when he was a representative in the Congress of the Republic of Texas. She was his third wife, remaining with him until his death. She came from a close-knit family in Alabama, many of whom also moved to Texas when she married the man who was an accomplished politician in both Tennessee and Texas, and who had won the Battle of San Jacinto during the Texas Revolution. The couple had eight children, and she gave birth to most of them while he was away attending to politics. Her mother Nancy Lea was a constant in their lives, helping with the children, managing the household help, and always providing either financial assistance or temporary housing. With the help of her extended family in Texas, Margaret convinced her husband to give up both alcohol and profane language. He believed his wife to be an exemplary woman of faith and, under her influence, converted to the Baptist denomination, after he had many years earlier been baptized a Catholic in Nacogdoches, Texas. (Full article...) Image 12 Joseph Havens Richards SJ (born Havens Cowles Richards; November 8, 1851 – June 9, 1923) was an American Catholic priest and Jesuit who became a prominent president of Georgetown University, where he instituted major reforms and significantly enhanced the quality and stature of the university. Born to a prominent Ohio family, his father was an Episcopal priest who controversially converted to Catholicism and had the infant Richards secretly baptized as a Catholic. Richards became the president of Georgetown University in 1888 and undertook significant construction, such as the completion of Healy Hall, which included work on Gaston Hall and Riggs Library, and the building of Dahlgren Chapel. Richards sought to transform Georgetown into a modern, comprehensive university. To that end, he bolstered the graduate programs, expanded the School of Medicine and Law School , established the Georgetown University Hospital, improved the astronomical observatory, and recruited prominent faculty. He also navigated tensions with the newly established Catholic University of America, which was located in the same city. Richards fought anti-Catholic discrimination by Ivy League universities, resulting in Harvard Law School admitting graduates of some Jesuit universities. (Full article...) Image 13 Turner in the 1890s Emma Louisa Turner or E L Turner FLS, FZS, HMBOU (9 June 1867 – 13 August 1940) was an English ornithologist and pioneering bird photographer. Turner took up photography at age 34, after meeting the wildlife photographer Richard Kearton. She joined the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) in 1901, and by 1904 she had started to give talks illustrated with her own photographic slides; by 1908, when aged 41, she was established as a professional lecturer. Turner spent part of each year in Norfolk, and her 1911 image of a nestling bittern in Norfolk was the first evidence of the species' return to the United Kingdom as a breeding bird after its local extinction in the late 19th century. She also travelled widely in the United Kingdom and abroad photographing birds. (Full article...) Image 14 Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd's name in Arabic calligraphy Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd al-Thaqafi (Arabic: ??????????? ???? ????? ??????? ????????????, al-Mukht?r ibn Ab? ?Ubayd al-Thaqaf?y; c. 622 – 3 April 687) was a pro-Alid revolutionary based in Kufa, who led a rebellion against the Umayyad Caliphate in 685 and ruled over most of Iraq for eighteen months during the Second Fitna. Born in Ta'if, Mukhtar moved to Iraq at a young age and grew up in Kufa. Following the death of Husayn ibn Ali, a grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, at the hands of the Umayyad army in the Battle of Karbala in 680, he allied with the rival caliph Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr in Mecca, but the alliance was short-lived. Mukhtar returned to Kufa where he declared Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, a son of caliph Ali (r. 656–661) and brother of Husayn, the mahdi and the imam, and called for the establishment of an Alid caliphate and retaliation for Husayn's killing. He took over Kufa in October 685, after expelling its Zubayrid governor, and later ordered the execution of those involved in the killing of Husayn. Hostile relations with Ibn al-Zubayr ultimately led to Mukhtar's death by the forces of the Zubayrid governor of Basra, Mus'ab ibn al-Zubayr, following a four-month siege. (Full article...) Image 15 Engraving of Percy Thomas Percy (c.?1560 – 8 November 1605) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605. A tall, physically impressive man, little is known of his early life beyond his matriculation in 1579 at the University of Cambridge, and his marriage in 1591 to Martha Wright. In 1596 his second cousin once removed, Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland, appointed him constable of Alnwick Castle and made him responsible for the Percy family's northern estates. He served the earl in the Low Countries in about 1600–1601, and in the years before 1603 was his intermediary in a series of confidential communications with King James VI of Scotland. Following James's accession to the English throne in 1603, Percy became disenchanted with the new king, who he supposed had reneged on his promises of toleration for English Catholics. His meeting in June 1603 with Robert Catesby, a religious zealot similarly unimpressed with the new royal Stuart dynasty, led the following year to his joining Catesby's conspiracy to kill the king and his ministers by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder. Percy helped fund the group and secured the leases to certain properties in London, one of which was the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords, in which the gunpowder was finally placed. The conspirators also planned to instigate an uprising in the Midlands and to simultaneously kidnap James's daughter, Princess Elizabeth. Percy was to remain in London and secure the capture of her brother, Prince Henry. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Swedish painter, ceramist, designer, and writer Tyra Lundgren was one of the most versatile artists of the 20th century? ... that Francis Dzierozynski's dispute with Archbishop Ambrose Maréchal over land ownership in Maryland escalated to involve Pope Pius VII and two U.S. secretaries of state? ... that Swedish actor Christopher Wollter started his career as a teenage reporter for the SVT children's television show Barnjournalen? ... that after surviving the Holocaust, writer Trudi Birger moved to Israel with her family and founded a non-profit dental clinic? ... that President Barack Obama celebrated his 50th birthday by playing basketball with Shane Battier, LeBron James, Magic Johnson, Maya Moore, Alonzo Mourning, Joakim Noah, Chris Paul, and Derrick Rose? ... that the 2017 Bishop Maginn High School baseball team largely consisted of Karen refugees? ... that Flying Apsaras Award winner Tian Chengren worked as an actor until the age of 92? ... that three members of the Harrison family of Virginia served as President of the United States? ... that at the age of 12, the Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse became the youngest ever Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo Calf Pipe and Bundle? ... that Ugandan president Idi Amin reportedly shot dead the leader of the Arube uprising when the latter tried to arrest him? ... that Swedish writer Annie Åkerhielm was an active campaigner against women's suffrage and democracy? ... that a line from the 1899 poem "Sympathy" provided the title for Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 2Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 3James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 4A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 5Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 6John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 7Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 8Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Vincent van GoghPainting credit: John Russell Vincent van Gogh is an oil-on-canvas portrait by Australian painter John Russell, dated 1886. It depicts Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, who became lifelong friends with Russell after meeting him at Fernand Cormon's atelier in Paris, which they both attended. Painted in a realist and academic manner, the portrait shows hints of the impressionist techniques with which they began experimenting in the latter half of the 1880s. It is the earliest of three portraits painted of Van Gogh by his contemporaries, the other two being Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887) and Paul Gauguin's The Painter of Sunflowers (1888). Van Gogh seems to have been particularly attached to Russell's portrait, which Russell gifted to him as a mark of their friendship. The painting passed from Van Gogh to his brother Theo and then to their family; it is now in the collection of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. More selected portraits Image 2 Jean-Baptiste CarpeauxImage credit: The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux was a 19th-century French sculptor and painter who sought to inject movement and spontaneity into his works. This engraving, done to commemorate him after his death, shows his sculpture Flore below him, and others of his works above. In his time, some of his works, particularly La Danse, were criticised as indecent, but today his sculptures are exhibited in major museums of art worldwide. More selected portraits Image 3 Walt WhitmanPhotograph: George C. Cox; restoration: Adam Cuerden Walt Whitman (1819–1892) was an American poet, essayist and journalist. A humanist, he was a part of the transition between transcendentalism and realism, incorporating both views in his works. Whitman is among the most influential poets in the American canon, often called the father of free verse. His work was very controversial in its time, particularly his poetry collection Leaves of Grass (first published in 1855, but continuously revised until Whitman's death), which was described as obscene for its overt sexuality. More selected portraits Image 4 Pedro II of BrazilPhoto: Mathew Brady/Levin Corbin Handy Emperor of Brazil Pedro II was the second and last ruler of the Empire of Brazil, reigning for over 58 years. Born in Rio de Janeiro, his father Pedro I's abrupt abdication and flight to Europe in 1831 left him as Emperor at the age of five. Inheriting an Empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II turned Brazil into an emerging power in the international arena. On November 15, 1889, he was overthrown in a coup d'état by a clique of military leaders who declared Brazil a republic. However, he had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support, and did not support any attempt to restore the monarchy. More selected portraits Image 5 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 6 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. More selected portraits Image 7 Robert William ThomsonImage credit: Illustrated London News The obituary of Robert William Thomson as it appeared in the Illustrated London News on 29 March 1873. Thomson was the inventor of the pneumatic tyre, the elliptic rotary steam engine and locomotive traction engine, the portable steam crane, and numerous other inventions. The obituary preceding his is for Evelyn Denison, 1st Viscount Ossington. More selected portraits Image 8 Mark RuttePhoto: Nick van Ormondt Mark Rutte is (as of 2011) the incumbent Prime Minister of the Netherlands. He has been the leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) party since 2006. In the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in their occupying 31 of the 150 seats in the House of Representatives. When he was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal Prime Minister in the Netherlands in 92 years. More selected portraits Image 9 Louis PasteurPhotograph: Nadar; restoration: Chris Woodrich Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) was a French chemist and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation and pasteurization. He reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His medical discoveries provided direct support for the germ theory of disease and its application in clinical medicine. Together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch, he is regarded as one of the three main founders of bacteriology. More selected portraits Image 10 Alexz JohnsonPhoto: Epitome Pictures Alexz Johnson (b. 1986) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and actress, best known for roles as Jude Harrison in the CTV series Instant Star (character shown here), Annie Thelan in the Disney Channel series So Weird, and as Erin Ulmer in the 2006 horror film Final Destination 3. Her album Voodoo was released in 2010. More selected portraits Image 11 Wayne GretzkyPhoto credit: Håkan Dahlström Ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky, as a member of the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL) in 1997. Gretzky, nicknamed "The Great One", is widely considered the best hockey player of all time. Upon his retirement in 1999, he held forty regular-season records, fifteen playoff records, and six All-Star records. He is the only NHL player to total over 200 points in one season—a feat he accomplished four times. In addition, he tallied over 100 points in 15 NHL seasons, 13 of them consecutively. He is the only player to have his number (99) officially retired by the NHL for all teams. More selected portraits Image 12 Enoch PowellPhotograph: Allan Warren Enoch Powell (1912–98), a professor of Ancient Greek by age 25 and brigadier during World War II, took up politics in the late 1940s and in the 1960s was selected for several cabinet positions. In 1968, he gave the "Rivers of Blood" speech about the dangers of immigration to the United Kingdom and of proposed anti-discrimination legislation. More selected portraits Image 13 K. T. ThomasPhotograph credit: Augustus Binu K. T. Thomas (born 30 January 1937) is a former judge of the Supreme Court of India, known for his strong opinions on Indian socio-political matters. He was selected as a district and sessions judge in 1977, and became a judge of the Kerala High Court in 1985. A decade later, he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court, on which he served until retiring in 2002. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Indian government in 2007 for services in the field of social affairs. More selected portraits Image 14 Nataliya GotsiyPhoto credit: Peter Duhon Ukrainian fashion model Nataliya Gotsiy modeling for Cynthia Rowley, Spring 2007 New York Fashion Week. She was the winner of the Ford Supermodel of the World 2004 search. She has appeared on the cover of French Elle and Italian Marie Claire and modeled for Behnaz Sarafpour, Christian Lacroix, Diane von Furstenberg, Dior, Dolce & Gabbana, Dries van Noten, Gucci, Oscar de la Renta, Valentino, and Vivienne Westwood, among others. More selected portraits Image 15 Alice PaulPhotograph credit: Harris & Ewing; restored by Adam Cuerden Alice Paul was an American suffragist, feminist, and women's-rights activist, and one of the main leaders and strategists of the campaign for the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits sex discrimination in the right to vote. Along with Lucy Burns and others, she strategized events such as the Woman Suffrage Procession and the Silent Sentinels as part of the successful campaign that resulted in the amendment's passage on August 18, 1920. This photograph of Paul was taken in 1915 by the Harris & Ewing photographic studio in Washington, D.C. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 24 Births 1632 - Baruch Spinoza, Dutch philosopher (d. 1677) 1784 - Zachary Taylor, 12th President of the United States (d. 1850) (pictured) 1849 - Frances Hodgson Burnett, British-born author (d. 1924) 1853 - Bat Masterson, American gunfighter (d. 1921) 1925 - William F. Buckley Jr., American writer (d. 2008) 1946 - Ted Bundy, American serial killer (d. 1989) Deaths 1957 - Diego Rivera, Mexican painter (b. 1886) 1963 - Lee Harvey Oswald, accused assassin of John F. Kennedy (b. 1939) 1991 - Freddie Mercury, Zanzibar-born singer (Queen) (b. 1946) 2005 - Pat Morita, American actor (b. 1932) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 24 November 2021 – Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) 22 November 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) 21 November 2021 – 2021 Chilean general election Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Updated: 21:33, 24 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "Not one of us knows what effect his life produces, and what he gives to others; that is hidden from us and must remain so, though we are often allowed to see some little fraction of it, so that we may not lose courage." — Albert Schweitzer In The Spiritual Life, 1947 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Harvey Bernard Milk (May 22, 1930 – November 27, 1978) was an American politician and the first openly gay elected official in the history of California, where he was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors. Although he was the most pro-LGBT politician in the United States at the time, politics and activism were not his early interests; he was neither open about his sexuality nor civically active until he was 40, after his experiences in the counterculture movement of the 1960s. In 1972, Milk moved from New York City to the Castro District of San Francisco amid a migration of gay and bisexual men. He took advantage of the growing political and economic power of the neighborhood to promote his interests and unsuccessfully ran three times for political office. Milk's theatrical campaigns earned him increasing popularity, and in 1977 he won a seat as a city supervisor. His election was made possible by a key component of a shift in San Francisco politics. (Full article...) Image 2 Shepard in 1971 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. (November 18, 1923 – July 21, 1998) was an American astronaut, naval aviator, test pilot, and businessman. In 1961, he became the second person and the first American to travel into space, and in 1971, he walked on the Moon. A graduate of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Shepard saw action with the surface navy during World War II. He became a naval aviator in 1946, and a test pilot in 1950. He was selected as one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts in 1959, and in May 1961 he made the first crewed Project Mercury flight, Mercury-Redstone 3, in a spacecraft he named Freedom 7. His craft entered space, but was not capable of achieving orbit. He became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space, and the first space traveler to manually control the orientation of his craft. In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission. He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B Freedom 7 II in honor of his first spacecraft, but the mission was canceled. (Full article...) Image 3 Jason Sendwe (1917 – 19 June 1964) was a Congolese politician and a leader of the Association Générale des Baluba du Katanga (BALUBAKAT) party. He served as Second Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Republic of the Congo) from August 1961 until January 1963, and as President of the Province of North Katanga from September 1963 until his death, with a brief interruption. Sendwe was born in 1917 in Mwanya, Kabongo Territory, Belgian Congo, to a Baluba family. He was educated in Methodist schools and nursing institutions. Unable to become a doctor due to a lack of medical schools in the Congo, he found work as a minister, teacher, and nurse. He became involved in several cultural organisations, and in 1957 founded BALUBAKAT to fight for the interests of the Baluba. He espoused nationalism and believed that the Congo should remain a united country after Belgian rule. In May 1960, shortly before the country's independence, he was elected to the newly constituted Chamber of Deputies. Sendwe sought to obtain control over the government of Katanga Province, but lost a power struggle against his rival, Moïse Tshombe, and the Confédération des associations tribales du Katanga (CONAKAT) party. Regardless, Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba nominated him for the office of State Commissioner for Katanga. (Full article...) Image 4 Hattie Jacques (/d?e?ks/; born Josephine Edwina Jaques; 7 February 1922 – 6 October 1980) was an English comedy actress of stage, radio and screen. She is best known as a regular of the Carry On films, where she typically played strict, no-nonsense characters, but was also a prolific television and radio performer. Jacques started her career in 1944 with an appearance at the Players' Theatre in London, but came to national prominence through her appearances on three highly popular radio series on the BBC: with Tommy Handley on It's That Man Again; with ventriloquist Peter Brough on Educating Archie; and then with Tony Hancock on Hancock's Half Hour. After the Second World War Jacques made her cinematic debut in Green for Danger (1946), in which she had a brief, uncredited role. From 1958 to 1974 she appeared in 14 Carry On films, playing various roles including the formidable hospital matron. On television she had a long professional partnership with Eric Sykes, with whom she co-starred in his long-running series Sykes and Sykes and a.... The role endeared her to the public and the two became staples of British television. (Full article...) Image 5 Leslie Groves, pictured here as a major general. Lieutenant General Leslie Richard Groves Jr. (17 August 1896 – 13 July 1970) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who oversaw the construction of the Pentagon and directed the Manhattan Project, a top secret research project that developed the atomic bomb during World War II. The son of a U.S. Army chaplain, Groves lived at various Army posts during his childhood. In 1918, he graduated fourth in his class at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and was commissioned into the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. In 1929, he went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition to conduct a survey for the Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal. Following the 1931 earthquake, Groves took over Managua's water supply system, for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit. He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1935 and 1936; and the Army War College in 1938 and 1939, after which he was posted to the War Department General Staff. Groves developed "a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty" and in 1940 he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General, tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress. In August 1941, he was appointed to create the gigantic office complex for the War Department's 40,000 staff that would ultimately become the Pentagon. (Full article...) Image 6 The LaRouche criminal trials in the mid-1980s stemmed from federal and state investigations into the activities of American political activist Lyndon LaRouche and members of his movement. They were charged with conspiring to commit fraud and soliciting loans they had no intention of repaying. LaRouche and his supporters disputed the charges, claiming the trials were politically motivated. In 1986, hundreds of state and federal officers raided LaRouche offices in Virginia and Massachusetts. A federal grand jury in Boston, Massachusetts, indicted LaRouche and 12 associates on credit card fraud and obstruction of justice. The subsequent trial, described as an "extravaganza", was repeatedly delayed and ended in mistrial. Following the mistrial, a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Virginia, indicted LaRouche and six associates. After a short trial in 1988, LaRouche was convicted of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and tax evasion, and was sentenced to prison for fifteen years. He entered prison in 1989 and was paroled five years later. At the same trial, his associates received lesser sentences for mail fraud and conspiracy. In separate state trials in Virginia and New York, 13 associates received terms ranging from one month to 77 years. The Virginia state trials were described as the highest-profile cases that the state Attorney General's office had ever prosecuted. Fourteen states issued injunctions against LaRouche-related organizations. Three LaRouche-related organizations were forced into bankruptcy after failing to pay contempt of court fines. (Full article...) Image 7 Marjorie Cameron Parsons Kimmel (April 23, 1922 – July 24, 1995), who professionally used the mononym Cameron, was an American artist, poet, actress and occultist. A follower of Thelema, the new religious movement established by the English occultist Aleister Crowley, she was married to rocket pioneer and fellow Thelemite Jack Parsons. Born in Belle Plaine, Iowa, Cameron volunteered for service in the United States Navy during the Second World War, after which she settled in Pasadena, California. There she met Parsons, who believed her to be the "elemental" woman that he had invoked in the early stages of a series of sex magic rituals called the Babalon Working. They entered into a relationship and were married in 1946. Their relationship was often strained, although Parsons sparked her involvement in Thelema and occultism. After Parsons' death in an explosion at their home in 1952, Cameron came to suspect that her husband had been assassinated and began rituals to communicate with his spirit. Moving to Beaumont, she established a multi-racial occult group called The Children, which dedicated itself to sex magic rituals with the intent of producing mixed-race "moon children" who would be devoted to the god Horus. The group soon dissolved, largely because many of its members became concerned by Cameron's increasingly apocalyptic predictions. (Full article...) Image 8 August Meyszner wearing the rank of SS-Oberführer in 1938 August Edler von Meyszner (3 August 1886 – 24 January 1947) was an Austrian Gendarmerie officer, right-wing politician, and senior Ordnungspolizei (order police) officer who held the post of Higher SS and Police Leader in the German-occupied territory of Serbia from January 1942 to March 1944, during World War II. He has been described as one of Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler's most brutal subordinates. Meyszner began his career as an officer in the Gendarmerie, served on the Italian Front during World War I and reached the rank of Major der Polizei by 1921. He joined the Austrian Nazi Party in September 1925 and became a right-wing parliamentary deputy and provincial minister in the Austrian province of Styria in 1930. Due to his involvement with the Nazis, Meyszner was forcibly retired in 1933 and arrested in February 1934, but released after three months at the Wöllersdorf concentration camp. That July, he was rearrested following an attempted coup, but escaped police custody and fled to Nazi Germany, where he joined the Ordnungspolizei (Orpo) and then the Allgemeine SS. After police postings in Austria, Germany and occupied Norway, Himmler appointed Meyszner as Higher SS and Police Leader in Serbia in early 1942. He was one of few Orpo officers to be appointed to such a role. (Full article...) Image 9 Sir James Chadwick, CH, FRS (20 October 1891 – 24 July 1974) was a British physicist who was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of the neutron in 1932. In 1941, he wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report, which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts. He was the head of the British team that worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II. He was knighted in Britain in 1945 for his achievements in physics. Chadwick graduated from the Victoria University of Manchester in 1911, where he studied under Ernest Rutherford (known as the "father of nuclear physics"). At Manchester, he continued to study under Rutherford until he was awarded his MSc in 1913. The same year, Chadwick was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851. He elected to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger in Berlin. Using Geiger's recently developed Geiger counter, Chadwick was able to demonstrate that beta radiation produced a continuous spectrum, and not discrete lines as had been thought. Still in Germany when World War I broke out in Europe, he spent the next four years in the Ruhleben internment camp. (Full article...) Image 10 Billings Learned Hand (/?l??rn?d/ LURN-id; January 27, 1872 – August 18, 1961) was an American jurist, lawyer, and judicial philosopher. He served as a federal trial judge on the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York and later as an appellate judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Born and raised in Albany, New York, Hand majored in philosophy at Harvard College and graduated with honors from Harvard Law School. After a short career as a lawyer in Albany and New York City, he was appointed at the age of 37 as a Federal District Judge in Manhattan in 1909. The profession suited his detached and open-minded temperament, and his decisions soon won him a reputation for craftsmanship and authority. Between 1909 and 1914, under the influence of Herbert Croly's social theories, Hand supported New Nationalism. He ran unsuccessfully as the Progressive Party's candidate for Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals in 1913, but withdrew from active politics shortly afterwards. In 1924, President Calvin Coolidge promoted Hand to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which he went on to lead as the Senior Circuit Judge (later retitled Chief Judge) from 1939 until his semi-retirement in 1951. Scholars have recognized the Second Circuit under Hand as one of the finest appeals courts in the country's history. Friends and admirers often lobbied for Hand's promotion to the Supreme Court, but circumstances and his political past conspired against his appointment. (Full article...) Image 11 Margaret Lea Houston, c. 1839 Margaret Lea Houston (April 11, 1819 – December 3, 1867) was First Lady of the Republic of Texas during her husband Sam Houston's second term as President of the Republic of Texas. They met following the first of his two non-consecutive terms as the Republic's president, and married when he was a representative in the Congress of the Republic of Texas. She was his third wife, remaining with him until his death. She came from a close-knit family in Alabama, many of whom also moved to Texas when she married the man who was an accomplished politician in both Tennessee and Texas, and who had won the Battle of San Jacinto during the Texas Revolution. The couple had eight children, and she gave birth to most of them while he was away attending to politics. Her mother Nancy Lea was a constant in their lives, helping with the children, managing the household help, and always providing either financial assistance or temporary housing. With the help of her extended family in Texas, Margaret convinced her husband to give up both alcohol and profane language. He believed his wife to be an exemplary woman of faith and, under her influence, converted to the Baptist denomination, after he had many years earlier been baptized a Catholic in Nacogdoches, Texas. (Full article...) Image 12 Joseph Havens Richards SJ (born Havens Cowles Richards; November 8, 1851 – June 9, 1923) was an American Catholic priest and Jesuit who became a prominent president of Georgetown University, where he instituted major reforms and significantly enhanced the quality and stature of the university. Born to a prominent Ohio family, his father was an Episcopal priest who controversially converted to Catholicism and had the infant Richards secretly baptized as a Catholic. Richards became the president of Georgetown University in 1888 and undertook significant construction, such as the completion of Healy Hall, which included work on Gaston Hall and Riggs Library, and the building of Dahlgren Chapel. Richards sought to transform Georgetown into a modern, comprehensive university. To that end, he bolstered the graduate programs, expanded the School of Medicine and Law School , established the Georgetown University Hospital, improved the astronomical observatory, and recruited prominent faculty. He also navigated tensions with the newly established Catholic University of America, which was located in the same city. Richards fought anti-Catholic discrimination by Ivy League universities, resulting in Harvard Law School admitting graduates of some Jesuit universities. (Full article...) Image 13 Turner in the 1890s Emma Louisa Turner or E L Turner FLS, FZS, HMBOU (9 June 1867 – 13 August 1940) was an English ornithologist and pioneering bird photographer. Turner took up photography at age 34, after meeting the wildlife photographer Richard Kearton. She joined the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) in 1901, and by 1904 she had started to give talks illustrated with her own photographic slides; by 1908, when aged 41, she was established as a professional lecturer. Turner spent part of each year in Norfolk, and her 1911 image of a nestling bittern in Norfolk was the first evidence of the species' return to the United Kingdom as a breeding bird after its local extinction in the late 19th century. She also travelled widely in the United Kingdom and abroad photographing birds. (Full article...) Image 14 Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd's name in Arabic calligraphy Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd al-Thaqafi (Arabic: ??????????? ???? ????? ??????? ????????????, al-Mukht?r ibn Ab? ?Ubayd al-Thaqaf?y; c. 622 – 3 April 687) was a pro-Alid revolutionary based in Kufa, who led a rebellion against the Umayyad Caliphate in 685 and ruled over most of Iraq for eighteen months during the Second Fitna. Born in Ta'if, Mukhtar moved to Iraq at a young age and grew up in Kufa. Following the death of Husayn ibn Ali, a grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, at the hands of the Umayyad army in the Battle of Karbala in 680, he allied with the rival caliph Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr in Mecca, but the alliance was short-lived. Mukhtar returned to Kufa where he declared Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, a son of caliph Ali (r. 656–661) and brother of Husayn, the mahdi and the imam, and called for the establishment of an Alid caliphate and retaliation for Husayn's killing. He took over Kufa in October 685, after expelling its Zubayrid governor, and later ordered the execution of those involved in the killing of Husayn. Hostile relations with Ibn al-Zubayr ultimately led to Mukhtar's death by the forces of the Zubayrid governor of Basra, Mus'ab ibn al-Zubayr, following a four-month siege. (Full article...) Image 15 Engraving of Percy Thomas Percy (c.?1560 – 8 November 1605) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605. A tall, physically impressive man, little is known of his early life beyond his matriculation in 1579 at the University of Cambridge, and his marriage in 1591 to Martha Wright. In 1596 his second cousin once removed, Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland, appointed him constable of Alnwick Castle and made him responsible for the Percy family's northern estates. He served the earl in the Low Countries in about 1600–1601, and in the years before 1603 was his intermediary in a series of confidential communications with King James VI of Scotland. Following James's accession to the English throne in 1603, Percy became disenchanted with the new king, who he supposed had reneged on his promises of toleration for English Catholics. His meeting in June 1603 with Robert Catesby, a religious zealot similarly unimpressed with the new royal Stuart dynasty, led the following year to his joining Catesby's conspiracy to kill the king and his ministers by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder. Percy helped fund the group and secured the leases to certain properties in London, one of which was the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords, in which the gunpowder was finally placed. The conspirators also planned to instigate an uprising in the Midlands and to simultaneously kidnap James's daughter, Princess Elizabeth. Percy was to remain in London and secure the capture of her brother, Prince Henry. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Swedish painter, ceramist, designer, and writer Tyra Lundgren was one of the most versatile artists of the 20th century? ... that Francis Dzierozynski's dispute with Archbishop Ambrose Maréchal over land ownership in Maryland escalated to involve Pope Pius VII and two U.S. secretaries of state? ... that Swedish actor Christopher Wollter started his career as a teenage reporter for the SVT children's television show Barnjournalen? ... that after surviving the Holocaust, writer Trudi Birger moved to Israel with her family and founded a non-profit dental clinic? ... that President Barack Obama celebrated his 50th birthday by playing basketball with Shane Battier, LeBron James, Magic Johnson, Maya Moore, Alonzo Mourning, Joakim Noah, Chris Paul, and Derrick Rose? ... that the 2017 Bishop Maginn High School baseball team largely consisted of Karen refugees? ... that Flying Apsaras Award winner Tian Chengren worked as an actor until the age of 92? ... that three members of the Harrison family of Virginia served as President of the United States? ... that at the age of 12, the Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse became the youngest ever Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo Calf Pipe and Bundle? ... that Ugandan president Idi Amin reportedly shot dead the leader of the Arube uprising when the latter tried to arrest him? ... that Swedish writer Annie Åkerhielm was an active campaigner against women's suffrage and democracy? ... that a line from the 1899 poem "Sympathy" provided the title for Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 2Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 3James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 4A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 5Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 6John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 7Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 8Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Vincent van GoghPainting credit: John Russell Vincent van Gogh is an oil-on-canvas portrait by Australian painter John Russell, dated 1886. It depicts Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, who became lifelong friends with Russell after meeting him at Fernand Cormon's atelier in Paris, which they both attended. Painted in a realist and academic manner, the portrait shows hints of the impressionist techniques with which they began experimenting in the latter half of the 1880s. It is the earliest of three portraits painted of Van Gogh by his contemporaries, the other two being Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887) and Paul Gauguin's The Painter of Sunflowers (1888). Van Gogh seems to have been particularly attached to Russell's portrait, which Russell gifted to him as a mark of their friendship. The painting passed from Van Gogh to his brother Theo and then to their family; it is now in the collection of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. More selected portraits Image 2 Jean-Baptiste CarpeauxImage credit: The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux was a 19th-century French sculptor and painter who sought to inject movement and spontaneity into his works. This engraving, done to commemorate him after his death, shows his sculpture Flore below him, and others of his works above. In his time, some of his works, particularly La Danse, were criticised as indecent, but today his sculptures are exhibited in major museums of art worldwide. More selected portraits Image 3 Walt WhitmanPhotograph: George C. Cox; restoration: Adam Cuerden Walt Whitman (1819–1892) was an American poet, essayist and journalist. A humanist, he was a part of the transition between transcendentalism and realism, incorporating both views in his works. Whitman is among the most influential poets in the American canon, often called the father of free verse. His work was very controversial in its time, particularly his poetry collection Leaves of Grass (first published in 1855, but continuously revised until Whitman's death), which was described as obscene for its overt sexuality. More selected portraits Image 4 Pedro II of BrazilPhoto: Mathew Brady/Levin Corbin Handy Emperor of Brazil Pedro II was the second and last ruler of the Empire of Brazil, reigning for over 58 years. Born in Rio de Janeiro, his father Pedro I's abrupt abdication and flight to Europe in 1831 left him as Emperor at the age of five. Inheriting an Empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II turned Brazil into an emerging power in the international arena. On November 15, 1889, he was overthrown in a coup d'état by a clique of military leaders who declared Brazil a republic. However, he had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support, and did not support any attempt to restore the monarchy. More selected portraits Image 5 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 6 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. More selected portraits Image 7 Robert William ThomsonImage credit: Illustrated London News The obituary of Robert William Thomson as it appeared in the Illustrated London News on 29 March 1873. Thomson was the inventor of the pneumatic tyre, the elliptic rotary steam engine and locomotive traction engine, the portable steam crane, and numerous other inventions. The obituary preceding his is for Evelyn Denison, 1st Viscount Ossington. More selected portraits Image 8 Mark RuttePhoto: Nick van Ormondt Mark Rutte is (as of 2011) the incumbent Prime Minister of the Netherlands. He has been the leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) party since 2006. In the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in their occupying 31 of the 150 seats in the House of Representatives. When he was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal Prime Minister in the Netherlands in 92 years. More selected portraits Image 9 Louis PasteurPhotograph: Nadar; restoration: Chris Woodrich Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) was a French chemist and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation and pasteurization. He reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His medical discoveries provided direct support for the germ theory of disease and its application in clinical medicine. Together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch, he is regarded as one of the three main founders of bacteriology. More selected portraits Image 10 Alexz JohnsonPhoto: Epitome Pictures Alexz Johnson (b. 1986) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and actress, best known for roles as Jude Harrison in the CTV series Instant Star (character shown here), Annie Thelan in the Disney Channel series So Weird, and as Erin Ulmer in the 2006 horror film Final Destination 3. Her album Voodoo was released in 2010. More selected portraits Image 11 Wayne GretzkyPhoto credit: Håkan Dahlström Ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky, as a member of the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL) in 1997. Gretzky, nicknamed "The Great One", is widely considered the best hockey player of all time. Upon his retirement in 1999, he held forty regular-season records, fifteen playoff records, and six All-Star records. He is the only NHL player to total over 200 points in one season—a feat he accomplished four times. In addition, he tallied over 100 points in 15 NHL seasons, 13 of them consecutively. He is the only player to have his number (99) officially retired by the NHL for all teams. More selected portraits Image 12 Enoch PowellPhotograph: Allan Warren Enoch Powell (1912–98), a professor of Ancient Greek by age 25 and brigadier during World War II, took up politics in the late 1940s and in the 1960s was selected for several cabinet positions. In 1968, he gave the "Rivers of Blood" speech about the dangers of immigration to the United Kingdom and of proposed anti-discrimination legislation. More selected portraits Image 13 K. T. ThomasPhotograph credit: Augustus Binu K. T. Thomas (born 30 January 1937) is a former judge of the Supreme Court of India, known for his strong opinions on Indian socio-political matters. He was selected as a district and sessions judge in 1977, and became a judge of the Kerala High Court in 1985. A decade later, he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court, on which he served until retiring in 2002. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Indian government in 2007 for services in the field of social affairs. More selected portraits Image 14 Nataliya GotsiyPhoto credit: Peter Duhon Ukrainian fashion model Nataliya Gotsiy modeling for Cynthia Rowley, Spring 2007 New York Fashion Week. She was the winner of the Ford Supermodel of the World 2004 search. She has appeared on the cover of French Elle and Italian Marie Claire and modeled for Behnaz Sarafpour, Christian Lacroix, Diane von Furstenberg, Dior, Dolce & Gabbana, Dries van Noten, Gucci, Oscar de la Renta, Valentino, and Vivienne Westwood, among others. More selected portraits Image 15 Alice PaulPhotograph credit: Harris & Ewing; restored by Adam Cuerden Alice Paul was an American suffragist, feminist, and women's-rights activist, and one of the main leaders and strategists of the campaign for the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits sex discrimination in the right to vote. Along with Lucy Burns and others, she strategized events such as the Woman Suffrage Procession and the Silent Sentinels as part of the successful campaign that resulted in the amendment's passage on August 18, 1920. This photograph of Paul was taken in 1915 by the Harris & Ewing photographic studio in Washington, D.C. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 24 Births 1632 - Baruch Spinoza, Dutch philosopher (d. 1677) 1784 - Zachary Taylor, 12th President of the United States (d. 1850) (pictured) 1849 - Frances Hodgson Burnett, British-born author (d. 1924) 1853 - Bat Masterson, American gunfighter (d. 1921) 1925 - William F. Buckley Jr., American writer (d. 2008) 1946 - Ted Bundy, American serial killer (d. 1989) Deaths 1957 - Diego Rivera, Mexican painter (b. 1886) 1963 - Lee Harvey Oswald, accused assassin of John F. Kennedy (b. 1939) 1991 - Freddie Mercury, Zanzibar-born singer (Queen) (b. 1946) 2005 - Pat Morita, American actor (b. 1932) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 24 November 2021 – Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) 22 November 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) 21 November 2021 – 2021 Chilean general election Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Updated: 21:33, 24 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "Not one of us knows what effect his life produces, and what he gives to others; that is hidden from us and must remain so, though we are often allowed to see some little fraction of it, so that we may not lose courage." — Albert Schweitzer In The Spiritual Life, 1947 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Harvey Bernard Milk (May 22, 1930 – November 27, 1978) was an American politician and the first openly gay elected official in the history of California, where he was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors. Although he was the most pro-LGBT politician in the United States at the time, politics and activism were not his early interests; he was neither open about his sexuality nor civically active until he was 40, after his experiences in the counterculture movement of the 1960s. In 1972, Milk moved from New York City to the Castro District of San Francisco amid a migration of gay and bisexual men. He took advantage of the growing political and economic power of the neighborhood to promote his interests and unsuccessfully ran three times for political office. Milk's theatrical campaigns earned him increasing popularity, and in 1977 he won a seat as a city supervisor. His election was made possible by a key component of a shift in San Francisco politics. (Full article...) Image 2 Shepard in 1971 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. (November 18, 1923 – July 21, 1998) was an American astronaut, naval aviator, test pilot, and businessman. In 1961, he became the second person and the first American to travel into space, and in 1971, he walked on the Moon. A graduate of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Shepard saw action with the surface navy during World War II. He became a naval aviator in 1946, and a test pilot in 1950. He was selected as one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts in 1959, and in May 1961 he made the first crewed Project Mercury flight, Mercury-Redstone 3, in a spacecraft he named Freedom 7. His craft entered space, but was not capable of achieving orbit. He became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space, and the first space traveler to manually control the orientation of his craft. In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission. He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B Freedom 7 II in honor of his first spacecraft, but the mission was canceled. (Full article...) Image 3 Jason Sendwe (1917 – 19 June 1964) was a Congolese politician and a leader of the Association Générale des Baluba du Katanga (BALUBAKAT) party. He served as Second Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Republic of the Congo) from August 1961 until January 1963, and as President of the Province of North Katanga from September 1963 until his death, with a brief interruption. Sendwe was born in 1917 in Mwanya, Kabongo Territory, Belgian Congo, to a Baluba family. He was educated in Methodist schools and nursing institutions. Unable to become a doctor due to a lack of medical schools in the Congo, he found work as a minister, teacher, and nurse. He became involved in several cultural organisations, and in 1957 founded BALUBAKAT to fight for the interests of the Baluba. He espoused nationalism and believed that the Congo should remain a united country after Belgian rule. In May 1960, shortly before the country's independence, he was elected to the newly constituted Chamber of Deputies. Sendwe sought to obtain control over the government of Katanga Province, but lost a power struggle against his rival, Moïse Tshombe, and the Confédération des associations tribales du Katanga (CONAKAT) party. Regardless, Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba nominated him for the office of State Commissioner for Katanga. (Full article...) Image 4 Hattie Jacques (/d?e?ks/; born Josephine Edwina Jaques; 7 February 1922 – 6 October 1980) was an English comedy actress of stage, radio and screen. She is best known as a regular of the Carry On films, where she typically played strict, no-nonsense characters, but was also a prolific television and radio performer. Jacques started her career in 1944 with an appearance at the Players' Theatre in London, but came to national prominence through her appearances on three highly popular radio series on the BBC: with Tommy Handley on It's That Man Again; with ventriloquist Peter Brough on Educating Archie; and then with Tony Hancock on Hancock's Half Hour. After the Second World War Jacques made her cinematic debut in Green for Danger (1946), in which she had a brief, uncredited role. From 1958 to 1974 she appeared in 14 Carry On films, playing various roles including the formidable hospital matron. On television she had a long professional partnership with Eric Sykes, with whom she co-starred in his long-running series Sykes and Sykes and a.... The role endeared her to the public and the two became staples of British television. (Full article...) Image 5 Leslie Groves, pictured here as a major general. Lieutenant General Leslie Richard Groves Jr. (17 August 1896 – 13 July 1970) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who oversaw the construction of the Pentagon and directed the Manhattan Project, a top secret research project that developed the atomic bomb during World War II. The son of a U.S. Army chaplain, Groves lived at various Army posts during his childhood. In 1918, he graduated fourth in his class at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and was commissioned into the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. In 1929, he went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition to conduct a survey for the Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal. Following the 1931 earthquake, Groves took over Managua's water supply system, for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit. He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1935 and 1936; and the Army War College in 1938 and 1939, after which he was posted to the War Department General Staff. Groves developed "a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty" and in 1940 he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General, tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress. In August 1941, he was appointed to create the gigantic office complex for the War Department's 40,000 staff that would ultimately become the Pentagon. (Full article...) Image 6 The LaRouche criminal trials in the mid-1980s stemmed from federal and state investigations into the activities of American political activist Lyndon LaRouche and members of his movement. They were charged with conspiring to commit fraud and soliciting loans they had no intention of repaying. LaRouche and his supporters disputed the charges, claiming the trials were politically motivated. In 1986, hundreds of state and federal officers raided LaRouche offices in Virginia and Massachusetts. A federal grand jury in Boston, Massachusetts, indicted LaRouche and 12 associates on credit card fraud and obstruction of justice. The subsequent trial, described as an "extravaganza", was repeatedly delayed and ended in mistrial. Following the mistrial, a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Virginia, indicted LaRouche and six associates. After a short trial in 1988, LaRouche was convicted of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and tax evasion, and was sentenced to prison for fifteen years. He entered prison in 1989 and was paroled five years later. At the same trial, his associates received lesser sentences for mail fraud and conspiracy. In separate state trials in Virginia and New York, 13 associates received terms ranging from one month to 77 years. The Virginia state trials were described as the highest-profile cases that the state Attorney General's office had ever prosecuted. Fourteen states issued injunctions against LaRouche-related organizations. Three LaRouche-related organizations were forced into bankruptcy after failing to pay contempt of court fines. (Full article...) Image 7 Marjorie Cameron Parsons Kimmel (April 23, 1922 – July 24, 1995), who professionally used the mononym Cameron, was an American artist, poet, actress and occultist. A follower of Thelema, the new religious movement established by the English occultist Aleister Crowley, she was married to rocket pioneer and fellow Thelemite Jack Parsons. Born in Belle Plaine, Iowa, Cameron volunteered for service in the United States Navy during the Second World War, after which she settled in Pasadena, California. There she met Parsons, who believed her to be the "elemental" woman that he had invoked in the early stages of a series of sex magic rituals called the Babalon Working. They entered into a relationship and were married in 1946. Their relationship was often strained, although Parsons sparked her involvement in Thelema and occultism. After Parsons' death in an explosion at their home in 1952, Cameron came to suspect that her husband had been assassinated and began rituals to communicate with his spirit. Moving to Beaumont, she established a multi-racial occult group called The Children, which dedicated itself to sex magic rituals with the intent of producing mixed-race "moon children" who would be devoted to the god Horus. The group soon dissolved, largely because many of its members became concerned by Cameron's increasingly apocalyptic predictions. (Full article...) Image 8 August Meyszner wearing the rank of SS-Oberführer in 1938 August Edler von Meyszner (3 August 1886 – 24 January 1947) was an Austrian Gendarmerie officer, right-wing politician, and senior Ordnungspolizei (order police) officer who held the post of Higher SS and Police Leader in the German-occupied territory of Serbia from January 1942 to March 1944, during World War II. He has been described as one of Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler's most brutal subordinates. Meyszner began his career as an officer in the Gendarmerie, served on the Italian Front during World War I and reached the rank of Major der Polizei by 1921. He joined the Austrian Nazi Party in September 1925 and became a right-wing parliamentary deputy and provincial minister in the Austrian province of Styria in 1930. Due to his involvement with the Nazis, Meyszner was forcibly retired in 1933 and arrested in February 1934, but released after three months at the Wöllersdorf concentration camp. That July, he was rearrested following an attempted coup, but escaped police custody and fled to Nazi Germany, where he joined the Ordnungspolizei (Orpo) and then the Allgemeine SS. After police postings in Austria, Germany and occupied Norway, Himmler appointed Meyszner as Higher SS and Police Leader in Serbia in early 1942. He was one of few Orpo officers to be appointed to such a role. (Full article...) Image 9 Sir James Chadwick, CH, FRS (20 October 1891 – 24 July 1974) was a British physicist who was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of the neutron in 1932. In 1941, he wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report, which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts. He was the head of the British team that worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II. He was knighted in Britain in 1945 for his achievements in physics. Chadwick graduated from the Victoria University of Manchester in 1911, where he studied under Ernest Rutherford (known as the "father of nuclear physics"). At Manchester, he continued to study under Rutherford until he was awarded his MSc in 1913. The same year, Chadwick was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851. He elected to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger in Berlin. Using Geiger's recently developed Geiger counter, Chadwick was able to demonstrate that beta radiation produced a continuous spectrum, and not discrete lines as had been thought. Still in Germany when World War I broke out in Europe, he spent the next four years in the Ruhleben internment camp. (Full article...) Image 10 Billings Learned Hand (/?l??rn?d/ LURN-id; January 27, 1872 – August 18, 1961) was an American jurist, lawyer, and judicial philosopher. He served as a federal trial judge on the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York and later as an appellate judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Born and raised in Albany, New York, Hand majored in philosophy at Harvard College and graduated with honors from Harvard Law School. After a short career as a lawyer in Albany and New York City, he was appointed at the age of 37 as a Federal District Judge in Manhattan in 1909. The profession suited his detached and open-minded temperament, and his decisions soon won him a reputation for craftsmanship and authority. Between 1909 and 1914, under the influence of Herbert Croly's social theories, Hand supported New Nationalism. He ran unsuccessfully as the Progressive Party's candidate for Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals in 1913, but withdrew from active politics shortly afterwards. In 1924, President Calvin Coolidge promoted Hand to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which he went on to lead as the Senior Circuit Judge (later retitled Chief Judge) from 1939 until his semi-retirement in 1951. Scholars have recognized the Second Circuit under Hand as one of the finest appeals courts in the country's history. Friends and admirers often lobbied for Hand's promotion to the Supreme Court, but circumstances and his political past conspired against his appointment. (Full article...) Image 11 Margaret Lea Houston, c. 1839 Margaret Lea Houston (April 11, 1819 – December 3, 1867) was First Lady of the Republic of Texas during her husband Sam Houston's second term as President of the Republic of Texas. They met following the first of his two non-consecutive terms as the Republic's president, and married when he was a representative in the Congress of the Republic of Texas. She was his third wife, remaining with him until his death. She came from a close-knit family in Alabama, many of whom also moved to Texas when she married the man who was an accomplished politician in both Tennessee and Texas, and who had won the Battle of San Jacinto during the Texas Revolution. The couple had eight children, and she gave birth to most of them while he was away attending to politics. Her mother Nancy Lea was a constant in their lives, helping with the children, managing the household help, and always providing either financial assistance or temporary housing. With the help of her extended family in Texas, Margaret convinced her husband to give up both alcohol and profane language. He believed his wife to be an exemplary woman of faith and, under her influence, converted to the Baptist denomination, after he had many years earlier been baptized a Catholic in Nacogdoches, Texas. (Full article...) Image 12 Joseph Havens Richards SJ (born Havens Cowles Richards; November 8, 1851 – June 9, 1923) was an American Catholic priest and Jesuit who became a prominent president of Georgetown University, where he instituted major reforms and significantly enhanced the quality and stature of the university. Born to a prominent Ohio family, his father was an Episcopal priest who controversially converted to Catholicism and had the infant Richards secretly baptized as a Catholic. Richards became the president of Georgetown University in 1888 and undertook significant construction, such as the completion of Healy Hall, which included work on Gaston Hall and Riggs Library, and the building of Dahlgren Chapel. Richards sought to transform Georgetown into a modern, comprehensive university. To that end, he bolstered the graduate programs, expanded the School of Medicine and Law School , established the Georgetown University Hospital, improved the astronomical observatory, and recruited prominent faculty. He also navigated tensions with the newly established Catholic University of America, which was located in the same city. Richards fought anti-Catholic discrimination by Ivy League universities, resulting in Harvard Law School admitting graduates of some Jesuit universities. (Full article...) Image 13 Turner in the 1890s Emma Louisa Turner or E L Turner FLS, FZS, HMBOU (9 June 1867 – 13 August 1940) was an English ornithologist and pioneering bird photographer. Turner took up photography at age 34, after meeting the wildlife photographer Richard Kearton. She joined the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) in 1901, and by 1904 she had started to give talks illustrated with her own photographic slides; by 1908, when aged 41, she was established as a professional lecturer. Turner spent part of each year in Norfolk, and her 1911 image of a nestling bittern in Norfolk was the first evidence of the species' return to the United Kingdom as a breeding bird after its local extinction in the late 19th century. She also travelled widely in the United Kingdom and abroad photographing birds. (Full article...) Image 14 Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd's name in Arabic calligraphy Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd al-Thaqafi (Arabic: ??????????? ???? ????? ??????? ????????????, al-Mukht?r ibn Ab? ?Ubayd al-Thaqaf?y; c. 622 – 3 April 687) was a pro-Alid revolutionary based in Kufa, who led a rebellion against the Umayyad Caliphate in 685 and ruled over most of Iraq for eighteen months during the Second Fitna. Born in Ta'if, Mukhtar moved to Iraq at a young age and grew up in Kufa. Following the death of Husayn ibn Ali, a grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, at the hands of the Umayyad army in the Battle of Karbala in 680, he allied with the rival caliph Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr in Mecca, but the alliance was short-lived. Mukhtar returned to Kufa where he declared Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, a son of caliph Ali (r. 656–661) and brother of Husayn, the mahdi and the imam, and called for the establishment of an Alid caliphate and retaliation for Husayn's killing. He took over Kufa in October 685, after expelling its Zubayrid governor, and later ordered the execution of those involved in the killing of Husayn. Hostile relations with Ibn al-Zubayr ultimately led to Mukhtar's death by the forces of the Zubayrid governor of Basra, Mus'ab ibn al-Zubayr, following a four-month siege. (Full article...) Image 15 Engraving of Percy Thomas Percy (c.?1560 – 8 November 1605) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605. A tall, physically impressive man, little is known of his early life beyond his matriculation in 1579 at the University of Cambridge, and his marriage in 1591 to Martha Wright. In 1596 his second cousin once removed, Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland, appointed him constable of Alnwick Castle and made him responsible for the Percy family's northern estates. He served the earl in the Low Countries in about 1600–1601, and in the years before 1603 was his intermediary in a series of confidential communications with King James VI of Scotland. Following James's accession to the English throne in 1603, Percy became disenchanted with the new king, who he supposed had reneged on his promises of toleration for English Catholics. His meeting in June 1603 with Robert Catesby, a religious zealot similarly unimpressed with the new royal Stuart dynasty, led the following year to his joining Catesby's conspiracy to kill the king and his ministers by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder. Percy helped fund the group and secured the leases to certain properties in London, one of which was the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords, in which the gunpowder was finally placed. The conspirators also planned to instigate an uprising in the Midlands and to simultaneously kidnap James's daughter, Princess Elizabeth. Percy was to remain in London and secure the capture of her brother, Prince Henry. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Swedish painter, ceramist, designer, and writer Tyra Lundgren was one of the most versatile artists of the 20th century? ... that Francis Dzierozynski's dispute with Archbishop Ambrose Maréchal over land ownership in Maryland escalated to involve Pope Pius VII and two U.S. secretaries of state? ... that Swedish actor Christopher Wollter started his career as a teenage reporter for the SVT children's television show Barnjournalen? ... that after surviving the Holocaust, writer Trudi Birger moved to Israel with her family and founded a non-profit dental clinic? ... that President Barack Obama celebrated his 50th birthday by playing basketball with Shane Battier, LeBron James, Magic Johnson, Maya Moore, Alonzo Mourning, Joakim Noah, Chris Paul, and Derrick Rose? ... that the 2017 Bishop Maginn High School baseball team largely consisted of Karen refugees? ... that Flying Apsaras Award winner Tian Chengren worked as an actor until the age of 92? ... that three members of the Harrison family of Virginia served as President of the United States? ... that at the age of 12, the Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse became the youngest ever Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo Calf Pipe and Bundle? ... that Ugandan president Idi Amin reportedly shot dead the leader of the Arube uprising when the latter tried to arrest him? ... that Swedish writer Annie Åkerhielm was an active campaigner against women's suffrage and democracy? ... that a line from the 1899 poem "Sympathy" provided the title for Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 2Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 3James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 4A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 5Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 6John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 7Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 8Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Vincent van GoghPainting credit: John Russell Vincent van Gogh is an oil-on-canvas portrait by Australian painter John Russell, dated 1886. It depicts Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, who became lifelong friends with Russell after meeting him at Fernand Cormon's atelier in Paris, which they both attended. Painted in a realist and academic manner, the portrait shows hints of the impressionist techniques with which they began experimenting in the latter half of the 1880s. It is the earliest of three portraits painted of Van Gogh by his contemporaries, the other two being Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887) and Paul Gauguin's The Painter of Sunflowers (1888). Van Gogh seems to have been particularly attached to Russell's portrait, which Russell gifted to him as a mark of their friendship. The painting passed from Van Gogh to his brother Theo and then to their family; it is now in the collection of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. More selected portraits Image 2 Jean-Baptiste CarpeauxImage credit: The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux was a 19th-century French sculptor and painter who sought to inject movement and spontaneity into his works. This engraving, done to commemorate him after his death, shows his sculpture Flore below him, and others of his works above. In his time, some of his works, particularly La Danse, were criticised as indecent, but today his sculptures are exhibited in major museums of art worldwide. More selected portraits Image 3 Walt WhitmanPhotograph: George C. Cox; restoration: Adam Cuerden Walt Whitman (1819–1892) was an American poet, essayist and journalist. A humanist, he was a part of the transition between transcendentalism and realism, incorporating both views in his works. Whitman is among the most influential poets in the American canon, often called the father of free verse. His work was very controversial in its time, particularly his poetry collection Leaves of Grass (first published in 1855, but continuously revised until Whitman's death), which was described as obscene for its overt sexuality. More selected portraits Image 4 Pedro II of BrazilPhoto: Mathew Brady/Levin Corbin Handy Emperor of Brazil Pedro II was the second and last ruler of the Empire of Brazil, reigning for over 58 years. Born in Rio de Janeiro, his father Pedro I's abrupt abdication and flight to Europe in 1831 left him as Emperor at the age of five. Inheriting an Empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II turned Brazil into an emerging power in the international arena. On November 15, 1889, he was overthrown in a coup d'état by a clique of military leaders who declared Brazil a republic. However, he had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support, and did not support any attempt to restore the monarchy. More selected portraits Image 5 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 6 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. More selected portraits Image 7 Robert William ThomsonImage credit: Illustrated London News The obituary of Robert William Thomson as it appeared in the Illustrated London News on 29 March 1873. Thomson was the inventor of the pneumatic tyre, the elliptic rotary steam engine and locomotive traction engine, the portable steam crane, and numerous other inventions. The obituary preceding his is for Evelyn Denison, 1st Viscount Ossington. More selected portraits Image 8 Mark RuttePhoto: Nick van Ormondt Mark Rutte is (as of 2011) the incumbent Prime Minister of the Netherlands. He has been the leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) party since 2006. In the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in their occupying 31 of the 150 seats in the House of Representatives. When he was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal Prime Minister in the Netherlands in 92 years. More selected portraits Image 9 Louis PasteurPhotograph: Nadar; restoration: Chris Woodrich Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) was a French chemist and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation and pasteurization. He reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His medical discoveries provided direct support for the germ theory of disease and its application in clinical medicine. Together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch, he is regarded as one of the three main founders of bacteriology. More selected portraits Image 10 Alexz JohnsonPhoto: Epitome Pictures Alexz Johnson (b. 1986) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and actress, best known for roles as Jude Harrison in the CTV series Instant Star (character shown here), Annie Thelan in the Disney Channel series So Weird, and as Erin Ulmer in the 2006 horror film Final Destination 3. Her album Voodoo was released in 2010. More selected portraits Image 11 Wayne GretzkyPhoto credit: Håkan Dahlström Ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky, as a member of the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL) in 1997. Gretzky, nicknamed "The Great One", is widely considered the best hockey player of all time. Upon his retirement in 1999, he held forty regular-season records, fifteen playoff records, and six All-Star records. He is the only NHL player to total over 200 points in one season—a feat he accomplished four times. In addition, he tallied over 100 points in 15 NHL seasons, 13 of them consecutively. He is the only player to have his number (99) officially retired by the NHL for all teams. More selected portraits Image 12 Enoch PowellPhotograph: Allan Warren Enoch Powell (1912–98), a professor of Ancient Greek by age 25 and brigadier during World War II, took up politics in the late 1940s and in the 1960s was selected for several cabinet positions. In 1968, he gave the "Rivers of Blood" speech about the dangers of immigration to the United Kingdom and of proposed anti-discrimination legislation. More selected portraits Image 13 K. T. ThomasPhotograph credit: Augustus Binu K. T. Thomas (born 30 January 1937) is a former judge of the Supreme Court of India, known for his strong opinions on Indian socio-political matters. He was selected as a district and sessions judge in 1977, and became a judge of the Kerala High Court in 1985. A decade later, he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court, on which he served until retiring in 2002. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Indian government in 2007 for services in the field of social affairs. More selected portraits Image 14 Nataliya GotsiyPhoto credit: Peter Duhon Ukrainian fashion model Nataliya Gotsiy modeling for Cynthia Rowley, Spring 2007 New York Fashion Week. She was the winner of the Ford Supermodel of the World 2004 search. She has appeared on the cover of French Elle and Italian Marie Claire and modeled for Behnaz Sarafpour, Christian Lacroix, Diane von Furstenberg, Dior, Dolce & Gabbana, Dries van Noten, Gucci, Oscar de la Renta, Valentino, and Vivienne Westwood, among others. More selected portraits Image 15 Alice PaulPhotograph credit: Harris & Ewing; restored by Adam Cuerden Alice Paul was an American suffragist, feminist, and women's-rights activist, and one of the main leaders and strategists of the campaign for the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits sex discrimination in the right to vote. Along with Lucy Burns and others, she strategized events such as the Woman Suffrage Procession and the Silent Sentinels as part of the successful campaign that resulted in the amendment's passage on August 18, 1920. This photograph of Paul was taken in 1915 by the Harris & Ewing photographic studio in Washington, D.C. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 24 Births 1632 - Baruch Spinoza, Dutch philosopher (d. 1677) 1784 - Zachary Taylor, 12th President of the United States (d. 1850) (pictured) 1849 - Frances Hodgson Burnett, British-born author (d. 1924) 1853 - Bat Masterson, American gunfighter (d. 1921) 1925 - William F. Buckley Jr., American writer (d. 2008) 1946 - Ted Bundy, American serial killer (d. 1989) Deaths 1957 - Diego Rivera, Mexican painter (b. 1886) 1963 - Lee Harvey Oswald, accused assassin of John F. Kennedy (b. 1939) 1991 - Freddie Mercury, Zanzibar-born singer (Queen) (b. 1946) 2005 - Pat Morita, American actor (b. 1932) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 24 November 2021 – Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) 22 November 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) 21 November 2021 – 2021 Chilean general election Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Updated: 21:33, 24 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "Not one of us knows what effect his life produces, and what he gives to others; that is hidden from us and must remain so, though we are often allowed to see some little fraction of it, so that we may not lose courage." — Albert Schweitzer In The Spiritual Life, 1947 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Harvey Bernard Milk (May 22, 1930 – November 27, 1978) was an American politician and the first openly gay elected official in the history of California, where he was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors. Although he was the most pro-LGBT politician in the United States at the time, politics and activism were not his early interests; he was neither open about his sexuality nor civically active until he was 40, after his experiences in the counterculture movement of the 1960s. In 1972, Milk moved from New York City to the Castro District of San Francisco amid a migration of gay and bisexual men. He took advantage of the growing political and economic power of the neighborhood to promote his interests and unsuccessfully ran three times for political office. Milk's theatrical campaigns earned him increasing popularity, and in 1977 he won a seat as a city supervisor. His election was made possible by a key component of a shift in San Francisco politics. (Full article...) Image 2 Shepard in 1971 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. (November 18, 1923 – July 21, 1998) was an American astronaut, naval aviator, test pilot, and businessman. In 1961, he became the second person and the first American to travel into space, and in 1971, he walked on the Moon. A graduate of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Shepard saw action with the surface navy during World War II. He became a naval aviator in 1946, and a test pilot in 1950. He was selected as one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts in 1959, and in May 1961 he made the first crewed Project Mercury flight, Mercury-Redstone 3, in a spacecraft he named Freedom 7. His craft entered space, but was not capable of achieving orbit. He became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space, and the first space traveler to manually control the orientation of his craft. In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission. He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B Freedom 7 II in honor of his first spacecraft, but the mission was canceled. (Full article...) Image 3 Jason Sendwe (1917 – 19 June 1964) was a Congolese politician and a leader of the Association Générale des Baluba du Katanga (BALUBAKAT) party. He served as Second Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Republic of the Congo) from August 1961 until January 1963, and as President of the Province of North Katanga from September 1963 until his death, with a brief interruption. Sendwe was born in 1917 in Mwanya, Kabongo Territory, Belgian Congo, to a Baluba family. He was educated in Methodist schools and nursing institutions. Unable to become a doctor due to a lack of medical schools in the Congo, he found work as a minister, teacher, and nurse. He became involved in several cultural organisations, and in 1957 founded BALUBAKAT to fight for the interests of the Baluba. He espoused nationalism and believed that the Congo should remain a united country after Belgian rule. In May 1960, shortly before the country's independence, he was elected to the newly constituted Chamber of Deputies. Sendwe sought to obtain control over the government of Katanga Province, but lost a power struggle against his rival, Moïse Tshombe, and the Confédération des associations tribales du Katanga (CONAKAT) party. Regardless, Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba nominated him for the office of State Commissioner for Katanga. (Full article...) Image 4 Hattie Jacques (/d?e?ks/; born Josephine Edwina Jaques; 7 February 1922 – 6 October 1980) was an English comedy actress of stage, radio and screen. She is best known as a regular of the Carry On films, where she typically played strict, no-nonsense characters, but was also a prolific television and radio performer. Jacques started her career in 1944 with an appearance at the Players' Theatre in London, but came to national prominence through her appearances on three highly popular radio series on the BBC: with Tommy Handley on It's That Man Again; with ventriloquist Peter Brough on Educating Archie; and then with Tony Hancock on Hancock's Half Hour. After the Second World War Jacques made her cinematic debut in Green for Danger (1946), in which she had a brief, uncredited role. From 1958 to 1974 she appeared in 14 Carry On films, playing various roles including the formidable hospital matron. On television she had a long professional partnership with Eric Sykes, with whom she co-starred in his long-running series Sykes and Sykes and a.... The role endeared her to the public and the two became staples of British television. (Full article...) Image 5 Leslie Groves, pictured here as a major general. Lieutenant General Leslie Richard Groves Jr. (17 August 1896 – 13 July 1970) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who oversaw the construction of the Pentagon and directed the Manhattan Project, a top secret research project that developed the atomic bomb during World War II. The son of a U.S. Army chaplain, Groves lived at various Army posts during his childhood. In 1918, he graduated fourth in his class at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and was commissioned into the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. In 1929, he went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition to conduct a survey for the Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal. Following the 1931 earthquake, Groves took over Managua's water supply system, for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit. He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1935 and 1936; and the Army War College in 1938 and 1939, after which he was posted to the War Department General Staff. Groves developed "a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty" and in 1940 he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General, tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress. In August 1941, he was appointed to create the gigantic office complex for the War Department's 40,000 staff that would ultimately become the Pentagon. (Full article...) Image 6 The LaRouche criminal trials in the mid-1980s stemmed from federal and state investigations into the activities of American political activist Lyndon LaRouche and members of his movement. They were charged with conspiring to commit fraud and soliciting loans they had no intention of repaying. LaRouche and his supporters disputed the charges, claiming the trials were politically motivated. In 1986, hundreds of state and federal officers raided LaRouche offices in Virginia and Massachusetts. A federal grand jury in Boston, Massachusetts, indicted LaRouche and 12 associates on credit card fraud and obstruction of justice. The subsequent trial, described as an "extravaganza", was repeatedly delayed and ended in mistrial. Following the mistrial, a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Virginia, indicted LaRouche and six associates. After a short trial in 1988, LaRouche was convicted of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and tax evasion, and was sentenced to prison for fifteen years. He entered prison in 1989 and was paroled five years later. At the same trial, his associates received lesser sentences for mail fraud and conspiracy. In separate state trials in Virginia and New York, 13 associates received terms ranging from one month to 77 years. The Virginia state trials were described as the highest-profile cases that the state Attorney General's office had ever prosecuted. Fourteen states issued injunctions against LaRouche-related organizations. Three LaRouche-related organizations were forced into bankruptcy after failing to pay contempt of court fines. (Full article...) Image 7 Marjorie Cameron Parsons Kimmel (April 23, 1922 – July 24, 1995), who professionally used the mononym Cameron, was an American artist, poet, actress and occultist. A follower of Thelema, the new religious movement established by the English occultist Aleister Crowley, she was married to rocket pioneer and fellow Thelemite Jack Parsons. Born in Belle Plaine, Iowa, Cameron volunteered for service in the United States Navy during the Second World War, after which she settled in Pasadena, California. There she met Parsons, who believed her to be the "elemental" woman that he had invoked in the early stages of a series of sex magic rituals called the Babalon Working. They entered into a relationship and were married in 1946. Their relationship was often strained, although Parsons sparked her involvement in Thelema and occultism. After Parsons' death in an explosion at their home in 1952, Cameron came to suspect that her husband had been assassinated and began rituals to communicate with his spirit. Moving to Beaumont, she established a multi-racial occult group called The Children, which dedicated itself to sex magic rituals with the intent of producing mixed-race "moon children" who would be devoted to the god Horus. The group soon dissolved, largely because many of its members became concerned by Cameron's increasingly apocalyptic predictions. (Full article...) Image 8 August Meyszner wearing the rank of SS-Oberführer in 1938 August Edler von Meyszner (3 August 1886 – 24 January 1947) was an Austrian Gendarmerie officer, right-wing politician, and senior Ordnungspolizei (order police) officer who held the post of Higher SS and Police Leader in the German-occupied territory of Serbia from January 1942 to March 1944, during World War II. He has been described as one of Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler's most brutal subordinates. Meyszner began his career as an officer in the Gendarmerie, served on the Italian Front during World War I and reached the rank of Major der Polizei by 1921. He joined the Austrian Nazi Party in September 1925 and became a right-wing parliamentary deputy and provincial minister in the Austrian province of Styria in 1930. Due to his involvement with the Nazis, Meyszner was forcibly retired in 1933 and arrested in February 1934, but released after three months at the Wöllersdorf concentration camp. That July, he was rearrested following an attempted coup, but escaped police custody and fled to Nazi Germany, where he joined the Ordnungspolizei (Orpo) and then the Allgemeine SS. After police postings in Austria, Germany and occupied Norway, Himmler appointed Meyszner as Higher SS and Police Leader in Serbia in early 1942. He was one of few Orpo officers to be appointed to such a role. (Full article...) Image 9 Sir James Chadwick, CH, FRS (20 October 1891 – 24 July 1974) was a British physicist who was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of the neutron in 1932. In 1941, he wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report, which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts. He was the head of the British team that worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II. He was knighted in Britain in 1945 for his achievements in physics. Chadwick graduated from the Victoria University of Manchester in 1911, where he studied under Ernest Rutherford (known as the "father of nuclear physics"). At Manchester, he continued to study under Rutherford until he was awarded his MSc in 1913. The same year, Chadwick was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851. He elected to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger in Berlin. Using Geiger's recently developed Geiger counter, Chadwick was able to demonstrate that beta radiation produced a continuous spectrum, and not discrete lines as had been thought. Still in Germany when World War I broke out in Europe, he spent the next four years in the Ruhleben internment camp. (Full article...) Image 10 Billings Learned Hand (/?l??rn?d/ LURN-id; January 27, 1872 – August 18, 1961) was an American jurist, lawyer, and judicial philosopher. He served as a federal trial judge on the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York and later as an appellate judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Born and raised in Albany, New York, Hand majored in philosophy at Harvard College and graduated with honors from Harvard Law School. After a short career as a lawyer in Albany and New York City, he was appointed at the age of 37 as a Federal District Judge in Manhattan in 1909. The profession suited his detached and open-minded temperament, and his decisions soon won him a reputation for craftsmanship and authority. Between 1909 and 1914, under the influence of Herbert Croly's social theories, Hand supported New Nationalism. He ran unsuccessfully as the Progressive Party's candidate for Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals in 1913, but withdrew from active politics shortly afterwards. In 1924, President Calvin Coolidge promoted Hand to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which he went on to lead as the Senior Circuit Judge (later retitled Chief Judge) from 1939 until his semi-retirement in 1951. Scholars have recognized the Second Circuit under Hand as one of the finest appeals courts in the country's history. Friends and admirers often lobbied for Hand's promotion to the Supreme Court, but circumstances and his political past conspired against his appointment. (Full article...) Image 11 Margaret Lea Houston, c. 1839 Margaret Lea Houston (April 11, 1819 – December 3, 1867) was First Lady of the Republic of Texas during her husband Sam Houston's second term as President of the Republic of Texas. They met following the first of his two non-consecutive terms as the Republic's president, and married when he was a representative in the Congress of the Republic of Texas. She was his third wife, remaining with him until his death. She came from a close-knit family in Alabama, many of whom also moved to Texas when she married the man who was an accomplished politician in both Tennessee and Texas, and who had won the Battle of San Jacinto during the Texas Revolution. The couple had eight children, and she gave birth to most of them while he was away attending to politics. Her mother Nancy Lea was a constant in their lives, helping with the children, managing the household help, and always providing either financial assistance or temporary housing. With the help of her extended family in Texas, Margaret convinced her husband to give up both alcohol and profane language. He believed his wife to be an exemplary woman of faith and, under her influence, converted to the Baptist denomination, after he had many years earlier been baptized a Catholic in Nacogdoches, Texas. (Full article...) Image 12 Joseph Havens Richards SJ (born Havens Cowles Richards; November 8, 1851 – June 9, 1923) was an American Catholic priest and Jesuit who became a prominent president of Georgetown University, where he instituted major reforms and significantly enhanced the quality and stature of the university. Born to a prominent Ohio family, his father was an Episcopal priest who controversially converted to Catholicism and had the infant Richards secretly baptized as a Catholic. Richards became the president of Georgetown University in 1888 and undertook significant construction, such as the completion of Healy Hall, which included work on Gaston Hall and Riggs Library, and the building of Dahlgren Chapel. Richards sought to transform Georgetown into a modern, comprehensive university. To that end, he bolstered the graduate programs, expanded the School of Medicine and Law School , established the Georgetown University Hospital, improved the astronomical observatory, and recruited prominent faculty. He also navigated tensions with the newly established Catholic University of America, which was located in the same city. Richards fought anti-Catholic discrimination by Ivy League universities, resulting in Harvard Law School admitting graduates of some Jesuit universities. (Full article...) Image 13 Turner in the 1890s Emma Louisa Turner or E L Turner FLS, FZS, HMBOU (9 June 1867 – 13 August 1940) was an English ornithologist and pioneering bird photographer. Turner took up photography at age 34, after meeting the wildlife photographer Richard Kearton. She joined the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) in 1901, and by 1904 she had started to give talks illustrated with her own photographic slides; by 1908, when aged 41, she was established as a professional lecturer. Turner spent part of each year in Norfolk, and her 1911 image of a nestling bittern in Norfolk was the first evidence of the species' return to the United Kingdom as a breeding bird after its local extinction in the late 19th century. She also travelled widely in the United Kingdom and abroad photographing birds. (Full article...) Image 14 Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd's name in Arabic calligraphy Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd al-Thaqafi (Arabic: ??????????? ???? ????? ??????? ????????????, al-Mukht?r ibn Ab? ?Ubayd al-Thaqaf?y; c. 622 – 3 April 687) was a pro-Alid revolutionary based in Kufa, who led a rebellion against the Umayyad Caliphate in 685 and ruled over most of Iraq for eighteen months during the Second Fitna. Born in Ta'if, Mukhtar moved to Iraq at a young age and grew up in Kufa. Following the death of Husayn ibn Ali, a grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, at the hands of the Umayyad army in the Battle of Karbala in 680, he allied with the rival caliph Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr in Mecca, but the alliance was short-lived. Mukhtar returned to Kufa where he declared Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, a son of caliph Ali (r. 656–661) and brother of Husayn, the mahdi and the imam, and called for the establishment of an Alid caliphate and retaliation for Husayn's killing. He took over Kufa in October 685, after expelling its Zubayrid governor, and later ordered the execution of those involved in the killing of Husayn. Hostile relations with Ibn al-Zubayr ultimately led to Mukhtar's death by the forces of the Zubayrid governor of Basra, Mus'ab ibn al-Zubayr, following a four-month siege. (Full article...) Image 15 Engraving of Percy Thomas Percy (c.?1560 – 8 November 1605) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605. A tall, physically impressive man, little is known of his early life beyond his matriculation in 1579 at the University of Cambridge, and his marriage in 1591 to Martha Wright. In 1596 his second cousin once removed, Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland, appointed him constable of Alnwick Castle and made him responsible for the Percy family's northern estates. He served the earl in the Low Countries in about 1600–1601, and in the years before 1603 was his intermediary in a series of confidential communications with King James VI of Scotland. Following James's accession to the English throne in 1603, Percy became disenchanted with the new king, who he supposed had reneged on his promises of toleration for English Catholics. His meeting in June 1603 with Robert Catesby, a religious zealot similarly unimpressed with the new royal Stuart dynasty, led the following year to his joining Catesby's conspiracy to kill the king and his ministers by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder. Percy helped fund the group and secured the leases to certain properties in London, one of which was the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords, in which the gunpowder was finally placed. The conspirators also planned to instigate an uprising in the Midlands and to simultaneously kidnap James's daughter, Princess Elizabeth. Percy was to remain in London and secure the capture of her brother, Prince Henry. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Swedish painter, ceramist, designer, and writer Tyra Lundgren was one of the most versatile artists of the 20th century? ... that Francis Dzierozynski's dispute with Archbishop Ambrose Maréchal over land ownership in Maryland escalated to involve Pope Pius VII and two U.S. secretaries of state? ... that Swedish actor Christopher Wollter started his career as a teenage reporter for the SVT children's television show Barnjournalen? ... that after surviving the Holocaust, writer Trudi Birger moved to Israel with her family and founded a non-profit dental clinic? ... that President Barack Obama celebrated his 50th birthday by playing basketball with Shane Battier, LeBron James, Magic Johnson, Maya Moore, Alonzo Mourning, Joakim Noah, Chris Paul, and Derrick Rose? ... that the 2017 Bishop Maginn High School baseball team largely consisted of Karen refugees? ... that Flying Apsaras Award winner Tian Chengren worked as an actor until the age of 92? ... that three members of the Harrison family of Virginia served as President of the United States? ... that at the age of 12, the Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse became the youngest ever Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo Calf Pipe and Bundle? ... that Ugandan president Idi Amin reportedly shot dead the leader of the Arube uprising when the latter tried to arrest him? ... that Swedish writer Annie Åkerhielm was an active campaigner against women's suffrage and democracy? ... that a line from the 1899 poem "Sympathy" provided the title for Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 2Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 3James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 4A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 5Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 6John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 7Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 8Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Vincent van GoghPainting credit: John Russell Vincent van Gogh is an oil-on-canvas portrait by Australian painter John Russell, dated 1886. It depicts Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, who became lifelong friends with Russell after meeting him at Fernand Cormon's atelier in Paris, which they both attended. Painted in a realist and academic manner, the portrait shows hints of the impressionist techniques with which they began experimenting in the latter half of the 1880s. It is the earliest of three portraits painted of Van Gogh by his contemporaries, the other two being Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887) and Paul Gauguin's The Painter of Sunflowers (1888). Van Gogh seems to have been particularly attached to Russell's portrait, which Russell gifted to him as a mark of their friendship. The painting passed from Van Gogh to his brother Theo and then to their family; it is now in the collection of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. More selected portraits Image 2 Jean-Baptiste CarpeauxImage credit: The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux was a 19th-century French sculptor and painter who sought to inject movement and spontaneity into his works. This engraving, done to commemorate him after his death, shows his sculpture Flore below him, and others of his works above. In his time, some of his works, particularly La Danse, were criticised as indecent, but today his sculptures are exhibited in major museums of art worldwide. More selected portraits Image 3 Walt WhitmanPhotograph: George C. Cox; restoration: Adam Cuerden Walt Whitman (1819–1892) was an American poet, essayist and journalist. A humanist, he was a part of the transition between transcendentalism and realism, incorporating both views in his works. Whitman is among the most influential poets in the American canon, often called the father of free verse. His work was very controversial in its time, particularly his poetry collection Leaves of Grass (first published in 1855, but continuously revised until Whitman's death), which was described as obscene for its overt sexuality. More selected portraits Image 4 Pedro II of BrazilPhoto: Mathew Brady/Levin Corbin Handy Emperor of Brazil Pedro II was the second and last ruler of the Empire of Brazil, reigning for over 58 years. Born in Rio de Janeiro, his father Pedro I's abrupt abdication and flight to Europe in 1831 left him as Emperor at the age of five. Inheriting an Empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II turned Brazil into an emerging power in the international arena. On November 15, 1889, he was overthrown in a coup d'état by a clique of military leaders who declared Brazil a republic. However, he had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support, and did not support any attempt to restore the monarchy. More selected portraits Image 5 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 6 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. More selected portraits Image 7 Robert William ThomsonImage credit: Illustrated London News The obituary of Robert William Thomson as it appeared in the Illustrated London News on 29 March 1873. Thomson was the inventor of the pneumatic tyre, the elliptic rotary steam engine and locomotive traction engine, the portable steam crane, and numerous other inventions. The obituary preceding his is for Evelyn Denison, 1st Viscount Ossington. More selected portraits Image 8 Mark RuttePhoto: Nick van Ormondt Mark Rutte is (as of 2011) the incumbent Prime Minister of the Netherlands. He has been the leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) party since 2006. In the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in their occupying 31 of the 150 seats in the House of Representatives. When he was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal Prime Minister in the Netherlands in 92 years. More selected portraits Image 9 Louis PasteurPhotograph: Nadar; restoration: Chris Woodrich Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) was a French chemist and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation and pasteurization. He reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His medical discoveries provided direct support for the germ theory of disease and its application in clinical medicine. Together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch, he is regarded as one of the three main founders of bacteriology. More selected portraits Image 10 Alexz JohnsonPhoto: Epitome Pictures Alexz Johnson (b. 1986) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and actress, best known for roles as Jude Harrison in the CTV series Instant Star (character shown here), Annie Thelan in the Disney Channel series So Weird, and as Erin Ulmer in the 2006 horror film Final Destination 3. Her album Voodoo was released in 2010. More selected portraits Image 11 Wayne GretzkyPhoto credit: Håkan Dahlström Ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky, as a member of the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL) in 1997. Gretzky, nicknamed "The Great One", is widely considered the best hockey player of all time. Upon his retirement in 1999, he held forty regular-season records, fifteen playoff records, and six All-Star records. He is the only NHL player to total over 200 points in one season—a feat he accomplished four times. In addition, he tallied over 100 points in 15 NHL seasons, 13 of them consecutively. He is the only player to have his number (99) officially retired by the NHL for all teams. More selected portraits Image 12 Enoch PowellPhotograph: Allan Warren Enoch Powell (1912–98), a professor of Ancient Greek by age 25 and brigadier during World War II, took up politics in the late 1940s and in the 1960s was selected for several cabinet positions. In 1968, he gave the "Rivers of Blood" speech about the dangers of immigration to the United Kingdom and of proposed anti-discrimination legislation. More selected portraits Image 13 K. T. ThomasPhotograph credit: Augustus Binu K. T. Thomas (born 30 January 1937) is a former judge of the Supreme Court of India, known for his strong opinions on Indian socio-political matters. He was selected as a district and sessions judge in 1977, and became a judge of the Kerala High Court in 1985. A decade later, he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court, on which he served until retiring in 2002. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Indian government in 2007 for services in the field of social affairs. More selected portraits Image 14 Nataliya GotsiyPhoto credit: Peter Duhon Ukrainian fashion model Nataliya Gotsiy modeling for Cynthia Rowley, Spring 2007 New York Fashion Week. She was the winner of the Ford Supermodel of the World 2004 search. She has appeared on the cover of French Elle and Italian Marie Claire and modeled for Behnaz Sarafpour, Christian Lacroix, Diane von Furstenberg, Dior, Dolce & Gabbana, Dries van Noten, Gucci, Oscar de la Renta, Valentino, and Vivienne Westwood, among others. More selected portraits Image 15 Alice PaulPhotograph credit: Harris & Ewing; restored by Adam Cuerden Alice Paul was an American suffragist, feminist, and women's-rights activist, and one of the main leaders and strategists of the campaign for the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits sex discrimination in the right to vote. Along with Lucy Burns and others, she strategized events such as the Woman Suffrage Procession and the Silent Sentinels as part of the successful campaign that resulted in the amendment's passage on August 18, 1920. This photograph of Paul was taken in 1915 by the Harris & Ewing photographic studio in Washington, D.C. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 24 Births 1632 - Baruch Spinoza, Dutch philosopher (d. 1677) 1784 - Zachary Taylor, 12th President of the United States (d. 1850) (pictured) 1849 - Frances Hodgson Burnett, British-born author (d. 1924) 1853 - Bat Masterson, American gunfighter (d. 1921) 1925 - William F. Buckley Jr., American writer (d. 2008) 1946 - Ted Bundy, American serial killer (d. 1989) Deaths 1957 - Diego Rivera, Mexican painter (b. 1886) 1963 - Lee Harvey Oswald, accused assassin of John F. Kennedy (b. 1939) 1991 - Freddie Mercury, Zanzibar-born singer (Queen) (b. 1946) 2005 - Pat Morita, American actor (b. 1932) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 24 November 2021 – Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) 22 November 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) 21 November 2021 – 2021 Chilean general election Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Updated: 21:33, 24 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "Not one of us knows what effect his life produces, and what he gives to others; that is hidden from us and must remain so, though we are often allowed to see some little fraction of it, so that we may not lose courage." — Albert Schweitzer In The Spiritual Life, 1947 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Harvey Bernard Milk (May 22, 1930 – November 27, 1978) was an American politician and the first openly gay elected official in the history of California, where he was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors. Although he was the most pro-LGBT politician in the United States at the time, politics and activism were not his early interests; he was neither open about his sexuality nor civically active until he was 40, after his experiences in the counterculture movement of the 1960s. In 1972, Milk moved from New York City to the Castro District of San Francisco amid a migration of gay and bisexual men. He took advantage of the growing political and economic power of the neighborhood to promote his interests and unsuccessfully ran three times for political office. Milk's theatrical campaigns earned him increasing popularity, and in 1977 he won a seat as a city supervisor. His election was made possible by a key component of a shift in San Francisco politics. (Full article...) Image 2 Shepard in 1971 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. (November 18, 1923 – July 21, 1998) was an American astronaut, naval aviator, test pilot, and businessman. In 1961, he became the second person and the first American to travel into space, and in 1971, he walked on the Moon. A graduate of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Shepard saw action with the surface navy during World War II. He became a naval aviator in 1946, and a test pilot in 1950. He was selected as one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts in 1959, and in May 1961 he made the first crewed Project Mercury flight, Mercury-Redstone 3, in a spacecraft he named Freedom 7. His craft entered space, but was not capable of achieving orbit. He became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space, and the first space traveler to manually control the orientation of his craft. In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission. He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B Freedom 7 II in honor of his first spacecraft, but the mission was canceled. (Full article...) Image 3 Jason Sendwe (1917 – 19 June 1964) was a Congolese politician and a leader of the Association Générale des Baluba du Katanga (BALUBAKAT) party. He served as Second Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Republic of the Congo) from August 1961 until January 1963, and as President of the Province of North Katanga from September 1963 until his death, with a brief interruption. Sendwe was born in 1917 in Mwanya, Kabongo Territory, Belgian Congo, to a Baluba family. He was educated in Methodist schools and nursing institutions. Unable to become a doctor due to a lack of medical schools in the Congo, he found work as a minister, teacher, and nurse. He became involved in several cultural organisations, and in 1957 founded BALUBAKAT to fight for the interests of the Baluba. He espoused nationalism and believed that the Congo should remain a united country after Belgian rule. In May 1960, shortly before the country's independence, he was elected to the newly constituted Chamber of Deputies. Sendwe sought to obtain control over the government of Katanga Province, but lost a power struggle against his rival, Moïse Tshombe, and the Confédération des associations tribales du Katanga (CONAKAT) party. Regardless, Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba nominated him for the office of State Commissioner for Katanga. (Full article...) Image 4 Hattie Jacques (/d?e?ks/; born Josephine Edwina Jaques; 7 February 1922 – 6 October 1980) was an English comedy actress of stage, radio and screen. She is best known as a regular of the Carry On films, where she typically played strict, no-nonsense characters, but was also a prolific television and radio performer. Jacques started her career in 1944 with an appearance at the Players' Theatre in London, but came to national prominence through her appearances on three highly popular radio series on the BBC: with Tommy Handley on It's That Man Again; with ventriloquist Peter Brough on Educating Archie; and then with Tony Hancock on Hancock's Half Hour. After the Second World War Jacques made her cinematic debut in Green for Danger (1946), in which she had a brief, uncredited role. From 1958 to 1974 she appeared in 14 Carry On films, playing various roles including the formidable hospital matron. On television she had a long professional partnership with Eric Sykes, with whom she co-starred in his long-running series Sykes and Sykes and a.... The role endeared her to the public and the two became staples of British television. (Full article...) Image 5 Leslie Groves, pictured here as a major general. Lieutenant General Leslie Richard Groves Jr. (17 August 1896 – 13 July 1970) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who oversaw the construction of the Pentagon and directed the Manhattan Project, a top secret research project that developed the atomic bomb during World War II. The son of a U.S. Army chaplain, Groves lived at various Army posts during his childhood. In 1918, he graduated fourth in his class at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and was commissioned into the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. In 1929, he went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition to conduct a survey for the Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal. Following the 1931 earthquake, Groves took over Managua's water supply system, for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit. He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1935 and 1936; and the Army War College in 1938 and 1939, after which he was posted to the War Department General Staff. Groves developed "a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty" and in 1940 he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General, tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress. In August 1941, he was appointed to create the gigantic office complex for the War Department's 40,000 staff that would ultimately become the Pentagon. (Full article...) Image 6 The LaRouche criminal trials in the mid-1980s stemmed from federal and state investigations into the activities of American political activist Lyndon LaRouche and members of his movement. They were charged with conspiring to commit fraud and soliciting loans they had no intention of repaying. LaRouche and his supporters disputed the charges, claiming the trials were politically motivated. In 1986, hundreds of state and federal officers raided LaRouche offices in Virginia and Massachusetts. A federal grand jury in Boston, Massachusetts, indicted LaRouche and 12 associates on credit card fraud and obstruction of justice. The subsequent trial, described as an "extravaganza", was repeatedly delayed and ended in mistrial. Following the mistrial, a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Virginia, indicted LaRouche and six associates. After a short trial in 1988, LaRouche was convicted of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and tax evasion, and was sentenced to prison for fifteen years. He entered prison in 1989 and was paroled five years later. At the same trial, his associates received lesser sentences for mail fraud and conspiracy. In separate state trials in Virginia and New York, 13 associates received terms ranging from one month to 77 years. The Virginia state trials were described as the highest-profile cases that the state Attorney General's office had ever prosecuted. Fourteen states issued injunctions against LaRouche-related organizations. Three LaRouche-related organizations were forced into bankruptcy after failing to pay contempt of court fines. (Full article...) Image 7 Marjorie Cameron Parsons Kimmel (April 23, 1922 – July 24, 1995), who professionally used the mononym Cameron, was an American artist, poet, actress and occultist. A follower of Thelema, the new religious movement established by the English occultist Aleister Crowley, she was married to rocket pioneer and fellow Thelemite Jack Parsons. Born in Belle Plaine, Iowa, Cameron volunteered for service in the United States Navy during the Second World War, after which she settled in Pasadena, California. There she met Parsons, who believed her to be the "elemental" woman that he had invoked in the early stages of a series of sex magic rituals called the Babalon Working. They entered into a relationship and were married in 1946. Their relationship was often strained, although Parsons sparked her involvement in Thelema and occultism. After Parsons' death in an explosion at their home in 1952, Cameron came to suspect that her husband had been assassinated and began rituals to communicate with his spirit. Moving to Beaumont, she established a multi-racial occult group called The Children, which dedicated itself to sex magic rituals with the intent of producing mixed-race "moon children" who would be devoted to the god Horus. The group soon dissolved, largely because many of its members became concerned by Cameron's increasingly apocalyptic predictions. (Full article...) Image 8 August Meyszner wearing the rank of SS-Oberführer in 1938 August Edler von Meyszner (3 August 1886 – 24 January 1947) was an Austrian Gendarmerie officer, right-wing politician, and senior Ordnungspolizei (order police) officer who held the post of Higher SS and Police Leader in the German-occupied territory of Serbia from January 1942 to March 1944, during World War II. He has been described as one of Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler's most brutal subordinates. Meyszner began his career as an officer in the Gendarmerie, served on the Italian Front during World War I and reached the rank of Major der Polizei by 1921. He joined the Austrian Nazi Party in September 1925 and became a right-wing parliamentary deputy and provincial minister in the Austrian province of Styria in 1930. Due to his involvement with the Nazis, Meyszner was forcibly retired in 1933 and arrested in February 1934, but released after three months at the Wöllersdorf concentration camp. That July, he was rearrested following an attempted coup, but escaped police custody and fled to Nazi Germany, where he joined the Ordnungspolizei (Orpo) and then the Allgemeine SS. After police postings in Austria, Germany and occupied Norway, Himmler appointed Meyszner as Higher SS and Police Leader in Serbia in early 1942. He was one of few Orpo officers to be appointed to such a role. (Full article...) Image 9 Sir James Chadwick, CH, FRS (20 October 1891 – 24 July 1974) was a British physicist who was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of the neutron in 1932. In 1941, he wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report, which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts. He was the head of the British team that worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II. He was knighted in Britain in 1945 for his achievements in physics. Chadwick graduated from the Victoria University of Manchester in 1911, where he studied under Ernest Rutherford (known as the "father of nuclear physics"). At Manchester, he continued to study under Rutherford until he was awarded his MSc in 1913. The same year, Chadwick was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851. He elected to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger in Berlin. Using Geiger's recently developed Geiger counter, Chadwick was able to demonstrate that beta radiation produced a continuous spectrum, and not discrete lines as had been thought. Still in Germany when World War I broke out in Europe, he spent the next four years in the Ruhleben internment camp. (Full article...) Image 10 Billings Learned Hand (/?l??rn?d/ LURN-id; January 27, 1872 – August 18, 1961) was an American jurist, lawyer, and judicial philosopher. He served as a federal trial judge on the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York and later as an appellate judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Born and raised in Albany, New York, Hand majored in philosophy at Harvard College and graduated with honors from Harvard Law School. After a short career as a lawyer in Albany and New York City, he was appointed at the age of 37 as a Federal District Judge in Manhattan in 1909. The profession suited his detached and open-minded temperament, and his decisions soon won him a reputation for craftsmanship and authority. Between 1909 and 1914, under the influence of Herbert Croly's social theories, Hand supported New Nationalism. He ran unsuccessfully as the Progressive Party's candidate for Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals in 1913, but withdrew from active politics shortly afterwards. In 1924, President Calvin Coolidge promoted Hand to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which he went on to lead as the Senior Circuit Judge (later retitled Chief Judge) from 1939 until his semi-retirement in 1951. Scholars have recognized the Second Circuit under Hand as one of the finest appeals courts in the country's history. Friends and admirers often lobbied for Hand's promotion to the Supreme Court, but circumstances and his political past conspired against his appointment. (Full article...) Image 11 Margaret Lea Houston, c. 1839 Margaret Lea Houston (April 11, 1819 – December 3, 1867) was First Lady of the Republic of Texas during her husband Sam Houston's second term as President of the Republic of Texas. They met following the first of his two non-consecutive terms as the Republic's president, and married when he was a representative in the Congress of the Republic of Texas. She was his third wife, remaining with him until his death. She came from a close-knit family in Alabama, many of whom also moved to Texas when she married the man who was an accomplished politician in both Tennessee and Texas, and who had won the Battle of San Jacinto during the Texas Revolution. The couple had eight children, and she gave birth to most of them while he was away attending to politics. Her mother Nancy Lea was a constant in their lives, helping with the children, managing the household help, and always providing either financial assistance or temporary housing. With the help of her extended family in Texas, Margaret convinced her husband to give up both alcohol and profane language. He believed his wife to be an exemplary woman of faith and, under her influence, converted to the Baptist denomination, after he had many years earlier been baptized a Catholic in Nacogdoches, Texas. (Full article...) Image 12 Joseph Havens Richards SJ (born Havens Cowles Richards; November 8, 1851 – June 9, 1923) was an American Catholic priest and Jesuit who became a prominent president of Georgetown University, where he instituted major reforms and significantly enhanced the quality and stature of the university. Born to a prominent Ohio family, his father was an Episcopal priest who controversially converted to Catholicism and had the infant Richards secretly baptized as a Catholic. Richards became the president of Georgetown University in 1888 and undertook significant construction, such as the completion of Healy Hall, which included work on Gaston Hall and Riggs Library, and the building of Dahlgren Chapel. Richards sought to transform Georgetown into a modern, comprehensive university. To that end, he bolstered the graduate programs, expanded the School of Medicine and Law School , established the Georgetown University Hospital, improved the astronomical observatory, and recruited prominent faculty. He also navigated tensions with the newly established Catholic University of America, which was located in the same city. Richards fought anti-Catholic discrimination by Ivy League universities, resulting in Harvard Law School admitting graduates of some Jesuit universities. (Full article...) Image 13 Turner in the 1890s Emma Louisa Turner or E L Turner FLS, FZS, HMBOU (9 June 1867 – 13 August 1940) was an English ornithologist and pioneering bird photographer. Turner took up photography at age 34, after meeting the wildlife photographer Richard Kearton. She joined the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) in 1901, and by 1904 she had started to give talks illustrated with her own photographic slides; by 1908, when aged 41, she was established as a professional lecturer. Turner spent part of each year in Norfolk, and her 1911 image of a nestling bittern in Norfolk was the first evidence of the species' return to the United Kingdom as a breeding bird after its local extinction in the late 19th century. She also travelled widely in the United Kingdom and abroad photographing birds. (Full article...) Image 14 Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd's name in Arabic calligraphy Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd al-Thaqafi (Arabic: ??????????? ???? ????? ??????? ????????????, al-Mukht?r ibn Ab? ?Ubayd al-Thaqaf?y; c. 622 – 3 April 687) was a pro-Alid revolutionary based in Kufa, who led a rebellion against the Umayyad Caliphate in 685 and ruled over most of Iraq for eighteen months during the Second Fitna. Born in Ta'if, Mukhtar moved to Iraq at a young age and grew up in Kufa. Following the death of Husayn ibn Ali, a grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, at the hands of the Umayyad army in the Battle of Karbala in 680, he allied with the rival caliph Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr in Mecca, but the alliance was short-lived. Mukhtar returned to Kufa where he declared Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, a son of caliph Ali (r. 656–661) and brother of Husayn, the mahdi and the imam, and called for the establishment of an Alid caliphate and retaliation for Husayn's killing. He took over Kufa in October 685, after expelling its Zubayrid governor, and later ordered the execution of those involved in the killing of Husayn. Hostile relations with Ibn al-Zubayr ultimately led to Mukhtar's death by the forces of the Zubayrid governor of Basra, Mus'ab ibn al-Zubayr, following a four-month siege. (Full article...) Image 15 Engraving of Percy Thomas Percy (c.?1560 – 8 November 1605) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605. A tall, physically impressive man, little is known of his early life beyond his matriculation in 1579 at the University of Cambridge, and his marriage in 1591 to Martha Wright. In 1596 his second cousin once removed, Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland, appointed him constable of Alnwick Castle and made him responsible for the Percy family's northern estates. He served the earl in the Low Countries in about 1600–1601, and in the years before 1603 was his intermediary in a series of confidential communications with King James VI of Scotland. Following James's accession to the English throne in 1603, Percy became disenchanted with the new king, who he supposed had reneged on his promises of toleration for English Catholics. His meeting in June 1603 with Robert Catesby, a religious zealot similarly unimpressed with the new royal Stuart dynasty, led the following year to his joining Catesby's conspiracy to kill the king and his ministers by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder. Percy helped fund the group and secured the leases to certain properties in London, one of which was the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords, in which the gunpowder was finally placed. The conspirators also planned to instigate an uprising in the Midlands and to simultaneously kidnap James's daughter, Princess Elizabeth. Percy was to remain in London and secure the capture of her brother, Prince Henry. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Swedish painter, ceramist, designer, and writer Tyra Lundgren was one of the most versatile artists of the 20th century? ... that Francis Dzierozynski's dispute with Archbishop Ambrose Maréchal over land ownership in Maryland escalated to involve Pope Pius VII and two U.S. secretaries of state? ... that Swedish actor Christopher Wollter started his career as a teenage reporter for the SVT children's television show Barnjournalen? ... that after surviving the Holocaust, writer Trudi Birger moved to Israel with her family and founded a non-profit dental clinic? ... that President Barack Obama celebrated his 50th birthday by playing basketball with Shane Battier, LeBron James, Magic Johnson, Maya Moore, Alonzo Mourning, Joakim Noah, Chris Paul, and Derrick Rose? ... that the 2017 Bishop Maginn High School baseball team largely consisted of Karen refugees? ... that Flying Apsaras Award winner Tian Chengren worked as an actor until the age of 92? ... that three members of the Harrison family of Virginia served as President of the United States? ... that at the age of 12, the Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse became the youngest ever Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo Calf Pipe and Bundle? ... that Ugandan president Idi Amin reportedly shot dead the leader of the Arube uprising when the latter tried to arrest him? ... that Swedish writer Annie Åkerhielm was an active campaigner against women's suffrage and democracy? ... that a line from the 1899 poem "Sympathy" provided the title for Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 2Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 3James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 4A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 5Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 6John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 7Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 8Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Vincent van GoghPainting credit: John Russell Vincent van Gogh is an oil-on-canvas portrait by Australian painter John Russell, dated 1886. It depicts Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, who became lifelong friends with Russell after meeting him at Fernand Cormon's atelier in Paris, which they both attended. Painted in a realist and academic manner, the portrait shows hints of the impressionist techniques with which they began experimenting in the latter half of the 1880s. It is the earliest of three portraits painted of Van Gogh by his contemporaries, the other two being Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887) and Paul Gauguin's The Painter of Sunflowers (1888). Van Gogh seems to have been particularly attached to Russell's portrait, which Russell gifted to him as a mark of their friendship. The painting passed from Van Gogh to his brother Theo and then to their family; it is now in the collection of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. More selected portraits Image 2 Jean-Baptiste CarpeauxImage credit: The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux was a 19th-century French sculptor and painter who sought to inject movement and spontaneity into his works. This engraving, done to commemorate him after his death, shows his sculpture Flore below him, and others of his works above. In his time, some of his works, particularly La Danse, were criticised as indecent, but today his sculptures are exhibited in major museums of art worldwide. More selected portraits Image 3 Walt WhitmanPhotograph: George C. Cox; restoration: Adam Cuerden Walt Whitman (1819–1892) was an American poet, essayist and journalist. A humanist, he was a part of the transition between transcendentalism and realism, incorporating both views in his works. Whitman is among the most influential poets in the American canon, often called the father of free verse. His work was very controversial in its time, particularly his poetry collection Leaves of Grass (first published in 1855, but continuously revised until Whitman's death), which was described as obscene for its overt sexuality. More selected portraits Image 4 Pedro II of BrazilPhoto: Mathew Brady/Levin Corbin Handy Emperor of Brazil Pedro II was the second and last ruler of the Empire of Brazil, reigning for over 58 years. Born in Rio de Janeiro, his father Pedro I's abrupt abdication and flight to Europe in 1831 left him as Emperor at the age of five. Inheriting an Empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II turned Brazil into an emerging power in the international arena. On November 15, 1889, he was overthrown in a coup d'état by a clique of military leaders who declared Brazil a republic. However, he had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support, and did not support any attempt to restore the monarchy. More selected portraits Image 5 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 6 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. More selected portraits Image 7 Robert William ThomsonImage credit: Illustrated London News The obituary of Robert William Thomson as it appeared in the Illustrated London News on 29 March 1873. Thomson was the inventor of the pneumatic tyre, the elliptic rotary steam engine and locomotive traction engine, the portable steam crane, and numerous other inventions. The obituary preceding his is for Evelyn Denison, 1st Viscount Ossington. More selected portraits Image 8 Mark RuttePhoto: Nick van Ormondt Mark Rutte is (as of 2011) the incumbent Prime Minister of the Netherlands. He has been the leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) party since 2006. In the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in their occupying 31 of the 150 seats in the House of Representatives. When he was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal Prime Minister in the Netherlands in 92 years. More selected portraits Image 9 Louis PasteurPhotograph: Nadar; restoration: Chris Woodrich Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) was a French chemist and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation and pasteurization. He reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His medical discoveries provided direct support for the germ theory of disease and its application in clinical medicine. Together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch, he is regarded as one of the three main founders of bacteriology. More selected portraits Image 10 Alexz JohnsonPhoto: Epitome Pictures Alexz Johnson (b. 1986) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and actress, best known for roles as Jude Harrison in the CTV series Instant Star (character shown here), Annie Thelan in the Disney Channel series So Weird, and as Erin Ulmer in the 2006 horror film Final Destination 3. Her album Voodoo was released in 2010. More selected portraits Image 11 Wayne GretzkyPhoto credit: Håkan Dahlström Ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky, as a member of the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL) in 1997. Gretzky, nicknamed "The Great One", is widely considered the best hockey player of all time. Upon his retirement in 1999, he held forty regular-season records, fifteen playoff records, and six All-Star records. He is the only NHL player to total over 200 points in one season—a feat he accomplished four times. In addition, he tallied over 100 points in 15 NHL seasons, 13 of them consecutively. He is the only player to have his number (99) officially retired by the NHL for all teams. More selected portraits Image 12 Enoch PowellPhotograph: Allan Warren Enoch Powell (1912–98), a professor of Ancient Greek by age 25 and brigadier during World War II, took up politics in the late 1940s and in the 1960s was selected for several cabinet positions. In 1968, he gave the "Rivers of Blood" speech about the dangers of immigration to the United Kingdom and of proposed anti-discrimination legislation. More selected portraits Image 13 K. T. ThomasPhotograph credit: Augustus Binu K. T. Thomas (born 30 January 1937) is a former judge of the Supreme Court of India, known for his strong opinions on Indian socio-political matters. He was selected as a district and sessions judge in 1977, and became a judge of the Kerala High Court in 1985. A decade later, he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court, on which he served until retiring in 2002. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Indian government in 2007 for services in the field of social affairs. More selected portraits Image 14 Nataliya GotsiyPhoto credit: Peter Duhon Ukrainian fashion model Nataliya Gotsiy modeling for Cynthia Rowley, Spring 2007 New York Fashion Week. She was the winner of the Ford Supermodel of the World 2004 search. She has appeared on the cover of French Elle and Italian Marie Claire and modeled for Behnaz Sarafpour, Christian Lacroix, Diane von Furstenberg, Dior, Dolce & Gabbana, Dries van Noten, Gucci, Oscar de la Renta, Valentino, and Vivienne Westwood, among others. More selected portraits Image 15 Alice PaulPhotograph credit: Harris & Ewing; restored by Adam Cuerden Alice Paul was an American suffragist, feminist, and women's-rights activist, and one of the main leaders and strategists of the campaign for the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits sex discrimination in the right to vote. Along with Lucy Burns and others, she strategized events such as the Woman Suffrage Procession and the Silent Sentinels as part of the successful campaign that resulted in the amendment's passage on August 18, 1920. This photograph of Paul was taken in 1915 by the Harris & Ewing photographic studio in Washington, D.C. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 24 Births 1632 - Baruch Spinoza, Dutch philosopher (d. 1677) 1784 - Zachary Taylor, 12th President of the United States (d. 1850) (pictured) 1849 - Frances Hodgson Burnett, British-born author (d. 1924) 1853 - Bat Masterson, American gunfighter (d. 1921) 1925 - William F. Buckley Jr., American writer (d. 2008) 1946 - Ted Bundy, American serial killer (d. 1989) Deaths 1957 - Diego Rivera, Mexican painter (b. 1886) 1963 - Lee Harvey Oswald, accused assassin of John F. Kennedy (b. 1939) 1991 - Freddie Mercury, Zanzibar-born singer (Queen) (b. 1946) 2005 - Pat Morita, American actor (b. 1932) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 24 November 2021 – Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) 22 November 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) 21 November 2021 – 2021 Chilean general election Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Updated: 21:33, 24 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "Not one of us knows what effect his life produces, and what he gives to others; that is hidden from us and must remain so, though we are often allowed to see some little fraction of it, so that we may not lose courage." — Albert Schweitzer In The Spiritual Life, 1947 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Harvey Bernard Milk (May 22, 1930 – November 27, 1978) was an American politician and the first openly gay elected official in the history of California, where he was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors. Although he was the most pro-LGBT politician in the United States at the time, politics and activism were not his early interests; he was neither open about his sexuality nor civically active until he was 40, after his experiences in the counterculture movement of the 1960s. In 1972, Milk moved from New York City to the Castro District of San Francisco amid a migration of gay and bisexual men. He took advantage of the growing political and economic power of the neighborhood to promote his interests and unsuccessfully ran three times for political office. Milk's theatrical campaigns earned him increasing popularity, and in 1977 he won a seat as a city supervisor. His election was made possible by a key component of a shift in San Francisco politics. (Full article...) Image 2 Shepard in 1971 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. (November 18, 1923 – July 21, 1998) was an American astronaut, naval aviator, test pilot, and businessman. In 1961, he became the second person and the first American to travel into space, and in 1971, he walked on the Moon. A graduate of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Shepard saw action with the surface navy during World War II. He became a naval aviator in 1946, and a test pilot in 1950. He was selected as one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts in 1959, and in May 1961 he made the first crewed Project Mercury flight, Mercury-Redstone 3, in a spacecraft he named Freedom 7. His craft entered space, but was not capable of achieving orbit. He became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space, and the first space traveler to manually control the orientation of his craft. In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission. He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B Freedom 7 II in honor of his first spacecraft, but the mission was canceled. (Full article...) Image 3 Jason Sendwe (1917 – 19 June 1964) was a Congolese politician and a leader of the Association Générale des Baluba du Katanga (BALUBAKAT) party. He served as Second Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Republic of the Congo) from August 1961 until January 1963, and as President of the Province of North Katanga from September 1963 until his death, with a brief interruption. Sendwe was born in 1917 in Mwanya, Kabongo Territory, Belgian Congo, to a Baluba family. He was educated in Methodist schools and nursing institutions. Unable to become a doctor due to a lack of medical schools in the Congo, he found work as a minister, teacher, and nurse. He became involved in several cultural organisations, and in 1957 founded BALUBAKAT to fight for the interests of the Baluba. He espoused nationalism and believed that the Congo should remain a united country after Belgian rule. In May 1960, shortly before the country's independence, he was elected to the newly constituted Chamber of Deputies. Sendwe sought to obtain control over the government of Katanga Province, but lost a power struggle against his rival, Moïse Tshombe, and the Confédération des associations tribales du Katanga (CONAKAT) party. Regardless, Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba nominated him for the office of State Commissioner for Katanga. (Full article...) Image 4 Hattie Jacques (/d?e?ks/; born Josephine Edwina Jaques; 7 February 1922 – 6 October 1980) was an English comedy actress of stage, radio and screen. She is best known as a regular of the Carry On films, where she typically played strict, no-nonsense characters, but was also a prolific television and radio performer. Jacques started her career in 1944 with an appearance at the Players' Theatre in London, but came to national prominence through her appearances on three highly popular radio series on the BBC: with Tommy Handley on It's That Man Again; with ventriloquist Peter Brough on Educating Archie; and then with Tony Hancock on Hancock's Half Hour. After the Second World War Jacques made her cinematic debut in Green for Danger (1946), in which she had a brief, uncredited role. From 1958 to 1974 she appeared in 14 Carry On films, playing various roles including the formidable hospital matron. On television she had a long professional partnership with Eric Sykes, with whom she co-starred in his long-running series Sykes and Sykes and a.... The role endeared her to the public and the two became staples of British television. (Full article...) Image 5 Leslie Groves, pictured here as a major general. Lieutenant General Leslie Richard Groves Jr. (17 August 1896 – 13 July 1970) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who oversaw the construction of the Pentagon and directed the Manhattan Project, a top secret research project that developed the atomic bomb during World War II. The son of a U.S. Army chaplain, Groves lived at various Army posts during his childhood. In 1918, he graduated fourth in his class at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and was commissioned into the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. In 1929, he went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition to conduct a survey for the Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal. Following the 1931 earthquake, Groves took over Managua's water supply system, for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit. He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1935 and 1936; and the Army War College in 1938 and 1939, after which he was posted to the War Department General Staff. Groves developed "a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty" and in 1940 he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General, tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress. In August 1941, he was appointed to create the gigantic office complex for the War Department's 40,000 staff that would ultimately become the Pentagon. (Full article...) Image 6 The LaRouche criminal trials in the mid-1980s stemmed from federal and state investigations into the activities of American political activist Lyndon LaRouche and members of his movement. They were charged with conspiring to commit fraud and soliciting loans they had no intention of repaying. LaRouche and his supporters disputed the charges, claiming the trials were politically motivated. In 1986, hundreds of state and federal officers raided LaRouche offices in Virginia and Massachusetts. A federal grand jury in Boston, Massachusetts, indicted LaRouche and 12 associates on credit card fraud and obstruction of justice. The subsequent trial, described as an "extravaganza", was repeatedly delayed and ended in mistrial. Following the mistrial, a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Virginia, indicted LaRouche and six associates. After a short trial in 1988, LaRouche was convicted of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and tax evasion, and was sentenced to prison for fifteen years. He entered prison in 1989 and was paroled five years later. At the same trial, his associates received lesser sentences for mail fraud and conspiracy. In separate state trials in Virginia and New York, 13 associates received terms ranging from one month to 77 years. The Virginia state trials were described as the highest-profile cases that the state Attorney General's office had ever prosecuted. Fourteen states issued injunctions against LaRouche-related organizations. Three LaRouche-related organizations were forced into bankruptcy after failing to pay contempt of court fines. (Full article...) Image 7 Marjorie Cameron Parsons Kimmel (April 23, 1922 – July 24, 1995), who professionally used the mononym Cameron, was an American artist, poet, actress and occultist. A follower of Thelema, the new religious movement established by the English occultist Aleister Crowley, she was married to rocket pioneer and fellow Thelemite Jack Parsons. Born in Belle Plaine, Iowa, Cameron volunteered for service in the United States Navy during the Second World War, after which she settled in Pasadena, California. There she met Parsons, who believed her to be the "elemental" woman that he had invoked in the early stages of a series of sex magic rituals called the Babalon Working. They entered into a relationship and were married in 1946. Their relationship was often strained, although Parsons sparked her involvement in Thelema and occultism. After Parsons' death in an explosion at their home in 1952, Cameron came to suspect that her husband had been assassinated and began rituals to communicate with his spirit. Moving to Beaumont, she established a multi-racial occult group called The Children, which dedicated itself to sex magic rituals with the intent of producing mixed-race "moon children" who would be devoted to the god Horus. The group soon dissolved, largely because many of its members became concerned by Cameron's increasingly apocalyptic predictions. (Full article...) Image 8 August Meyszner wearing the rank of SS-Oberführer in 1938 August Edler von Meyszner (3 August 1886 – 24 January 1947) was an Austrian Gendarmerie officer, right-wing politician, and senior Ordnungspolizei (order police) officer who held the post of Higher SS and Police Leader in the German-occupied territory of Serbia from January 1942 to March 1944, during World War II. He has been described as one of Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler's most brutal subordinates. Meyszner began his career as an officer in the Gendarmerie, served on the Italian Front during World War I and reached the rank of Major der Polizei by 1921. He joined the Austrian Nazi Party in September 1925 and became a right-wing parliamentary deputy and provincial minister in the Austrian province of Styria in 1930. Due to his involvement with the Nazis, Meyszner was forcibly retired in 1933 and arrested in February 1934, but released after three months at the Wöllersdorf concentration camp. That July, he was rearrested following an attempted coup, but escaped police custody and fled to Nazi Germany, where he joined the Ordnungspolizei (Orpo) and then the Allgemeine SS. After police postings in Austria, Germany and occupied Norway, Himmler appointed Meyszner as Higher SS and Police Leader in Serbia in early 1942. He was one of few Orpo officers to be appointed to such a role. (Full article...) Image 9 Sir James Chadwick, CH, FRS (20 October 1891 – 24 July 1974) was a British physicist who was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of the neutron in 1932. In 1941, he wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report, which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts. He was the head of the British team that worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II. He was knighted in Britain in 1945 for his achievements in physics. Chadwick graduated from the Victoria University of Manchester in 1911, where he studied under Ernest Rutherford (known as the "father of nuclear physics"). At Manchester, he continued to study under Rutherford until he was awarded his MSc in 1913. The same year, Chadwick was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851. He elected to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger in Berlin. Using Geiger's recently developed Geiger counter, Chadwick was able to demonstrate that beta radiation produced a continuous spectrum, and not discrete lines as had been thought. Still in Germany when World War I broke out in Europe, he spent the next four years in the Ruhleben internment camp. (Full article...) Image 10 Billings Learned Hand (/?l??rn?d/ LURN-id; January 27, 1872 – August 18, 1961) was an American jurist, lawyer, and judicial philosopher. He served as a federal trial judge on the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York and later as an appellate judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Born and raised in Albany, New York, Hand majored in philosophy at Harvard College and graduated with honors from Harvard Law School. After a short career as a lawyer in Albany and New York City, he was appointed at the age of 37 as a Federal District Judge in Manhattan in 1909. The profession suited his detached and open-minded temperament, and his decisions soon won him a reputation for craftsmanship and authority. Between 1909 and 1914, under the influence of Herbert Croly's social theories, Hand supported New Nationalism. He ran unsuccessfully as the Progressive Party's candidate for Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals in 1913, but withdrew from active politics shortly afterwards. In 1924, President Calvin Coolidge promoted Hand to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which he went on to lead as the Senior Circuit Judge (later retitled Chief Judge) from 1939 until his semi-retirement in 1951. Scholars have recognized the Second Circuit under Hand as one of the finest appeals courts in the country's history. Friends and admirers often lobbied for Hand's promotion to the Supreme Court, but circumstances and his political past conspired against his appointment. (Full article...) Image 11 Margaret Lea Houston, c. 1839 Margaret Lea Houston (April 11, 1819 – December 3, 1867) was First Lady of the Republic of Texas during her husband Sam Houston's second term as President of the Republic of Texas. They met following the first of his two non-consecutive terms as the Republic's president, and married when he was a representative in the Congress of the Republic of Texas. She was his third wife, remaining with him until his death. She came from a close-knit family in Alabama, many of whom also moved to Texas when she married the man who was an accomplished politician in both Tennessee and Texas, and who had won the Battle of San Jacinto during the Texas Revolution. The couple had eight children, and she gave birth to most of them while he was away attending to politics. Her mother Nancy Lea was a constant in their lives, helping with the children, managing the household help, and always providing either financial assistance or temporary housing. With the help of her extended family in Texas, Margaret convinced her husband to give up both alcohol and profane language. He believed his wife to be an exemplary woman of faith and, under her influence, converted to the Baptist denomination, after he had many years earlier been baptized a Catholic in Nacogdoches, Texas. (Full article...) Image 12 Joseph Havens Richards SJ (born Havens Cowles Richards; November 8, 1851 – June 9, 1923) was an American Catholic priest and Jesuit who became a prominent president of Georgetown University, where he instituted major reforms and significantly enhanced the quality and stature of the university. Born to a prominent Ohio family, his father was an Episcopal priest who controversially converted to Catholicism and had the infant Richards secretly baptized as a Catholic. Richards became the president of Georgetown University in 1888 and undertook significant construction, such as the completion of Healy Hall, which included work on Gaston Hall and Riggs Library, and the building of Dahlgren Chapel. Richards sought to transform Georgetown into a modern, comprehensive university. To that end, he bolstered the graduate programs, expanded the School of Medicine and Law School , established the Georgetown University Hospital, improved the astronomical observatory, and recruited prominent faculty. He also navigated tensions with the newly established Catholic University of America, which was located in the same city. Richards fought anti-Catholic discrimination by Ivy League universities, resulting in Harvard Law School admitting graduates of some Jesuit universities. (Full article...) Image 13 Turner in the 1890s Emma Louisa Turner or E L Turner FLS, FZS, HMBOU (9 June 1867 – 13 August 1940) was an English ornithologist and pioneering bird photographer. Turner took up photography at age 34, after meeting the wildlife photographer Richard Kearton. She joined the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) in 1901, and by 1904 she had started to give talks illustrated with her own photographic slides; by 1908, when aged 41, she was established as a professional lecturer. Turner spent part of each year in Norfolk, and her 1911 image of a nestling bittern in Norfolk was the first evidence of the species' return to the United Kingdom as a breeding bird after its local extinction in the late 19th century. She also travelled widely in the United Kingdom and abroad photographing birds. (Full article...) Image 14 Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd's name in Arabic calligraphy Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd al-Thaqafi (Arabic: ??????????? ???? ????? ??????? ????????????, al-Mukht?r ibn Ab? ?Ubayd al-Thaqaf?y; c. 622 – 3 April 687) was a pro-Alid revolutionary based in Kufa, who led a rebellion against the Umayyad Caliphate in 685 and ruled over most of Iraq for eighteen months during the Second Fitna. Born in Ta'if, Mukhtar moved to Iraq at a young age and grew up in Kufa. Following the death of Husayn ibn Ali, a grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, at the hands of the Umayyad army in the Battle of Karbala in 680, he allied with the rival caliph Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr in Mecca, but the alliance was short-lived. Mukhtar returned to Kufa where he declared Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, a son of caliph Ali (r. 656–661) and brother of Husayn, the mahdi and the imam, and called for the establishment of an Alid caliphate and retaliation for Husayn's killing. He took over Kufa in October 685, after expelling its Zubayrid governor, and later ordered the execution of those involved in the killing of Husayn. Hostile relations with Ibn al-Zubayr ultimately led to Mukhtar's death by the forces of the Zubayrid governor of Basra, Mus'ab ibn al-Zubayr, following a four-month siege. (Full article...) Image 15 Engraving of Percy Thomas Percy (c.?1560 – 8 November 1605) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605. A tall, physically impressive man, little is known of his early life beyond his matriculation in 1579 at the University of Cambridge, and his marriage in 1591 to Martha Wright. In 1596 his second cousin once removed, Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland, appointed him constable of Alnwick Castle and made him responsible for the Percy family's northern estates. He served the earl in the Low Countries in about 1600–1601, and in the years before 1603 was his intermediary in a series of confidential communications with King James VI of Scotland. Following James's accession to the English throne in 1603, Percy became disenchanted with the new king, who he supposed had reneged on his promises of toleration for English Catholics. His meeting in June 1603 with Robert Catesby, a religious zealot similarly unimpressed with the new royal Stuart dynasty, led the following year to his joining Catesby's conspiracy to kill the king and his ministers by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder. Percy helped fund the group and secured the leases to certain properties in London, one of which was the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords, in which the gunpowder was finally placed. The conspirators also planned to instigate an uprising in the Midlands and to simultaneously kidnap James's daughter, Princess Elizabeth. Percy was to remain in London and secure the capture of her brother, Prince Henry. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Swedish painter, ceramist, designer, and writer Tyra Lundgren was one of the most versatile artists of the 20th century? ... that Francis Dzierozynski's dispute with Archbishop Ambrose Maréchal over land ownership in Maryland escalated to involve Pope Pius VII and two U.S. secretaries of state? ... that Swedish actor Christopher Wollter started his career as a teenage reporter for the SVT children's television show Barnjournalen? ... that after surviving the Holocaust, writer Trudi Birger moved to Israel with her family and founded a non-profit dental clinic? ... that President Barack Obama celebrated his 50th birthday by playing basketball with Shane Battier, LeBron James, Magic Johnson, Maya Moore, Alonzo Mourning, Joakim Noah, Chris Paul, and Derrick Rose? ... that the 2017 Bishop Maginn High School baseball team largely consisted of Karen refugees? ... that Flying Apsaras Award winner Tian Chengren worked as an actor until the age of 92? ... that three members of the Harrison family of Virginia served as President of the United States? ... that at the age of 12, the Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse became the youngest ever Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo Calf Pipe and Bundle? ... that Ugandan president Idi Amin reportedly shot dead the leader of the Arube uprising when the latter tried to arrest him? ... that Swedish writer Annie Åkerhielm was an active campaigner against women's suffrage and democracy? ... that a line from the 1899 poem "Sympathy" provided the title for Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 2Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 3James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 4A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 5Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 6John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 7Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 8Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Vincent van GoghPainting credit: John Russell Vincent van Gogh is an oil-on-canvas portrait by Australian painter John Russell, dated 1886. It depicts Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, who became lifelong friends with Russell after meeting him at Fernand Cormon's atelier in Paris, which they both attended. Painted in a realist and academic manner, the portrait shows hints of the impressionist techniques with which they began experimenting in the latter half of the 1880s. It is the earliest of three portraits painted of Van Gogh by his contemporaries, the other two being Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887) and Paul Gauguin's The Painter of Sunflowers (1888). Van Gogh seems to have been particularly attached to Russell's portrait, which Russell gifted to him as a mark of their friendship. The painting passed from Van Gogh to his brother Theo and then to their family; it is now in the collection of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. More selected portraits Image 2 Jean-Baptiste CarpeauxImage credit: The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux was a 19th-century French sculptor and painter who sought to inject movement and spontaneity into his works. This engraving, done to commemorate him after his death, shows his sculpture Flore below him, and others of his works above. In his time, some of his works, particularly La Danse, were criticised as indecent, but today his sculptures are exhibited in major museums of art worldwide. More selected portraits Image 3 Walt WhitmanPhotograph: George C. Cox; restoration: Adam Cuerden Walt Whitman (1819–1892) was an American poet, essayist and journalist. A humanist, he was a part of the transition between transcendentalism and realism, incorporating both views in his works. Whitman is among the most influential poets in the American canon, often called the father of free verse. His work was very controversial in its time, particularly his poetry collection Leaves of Grass (first published in 1855, but continuously revised until Whitman's death), which was described as obscene for its overt sexuality. More selected portraits Image 4 Pedro II of BrazilPhoto: Mathew Brady/Levin Corbin Handy Emperor of Brazil Pedro II was the second and last ruler of the Empire of Brazil, reigning for over 58 years. Born in Rio de Janeiro, his father Pedro I's abrupt abdication and flight to Europe in 1831 left him as Emperor at the age of five. Inheriting an Empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II turned Brazil into an emerging power in the international arena. On November 15, 1889, he was overthrown in a coup d'état by a clique of military leaders who declared Brazil a republic. However, he had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support, and did not support any attempt to restore the monarchy. More selected portraits Image 5 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 6 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. More selected portraits Image 7 Robert William ThomsonImage credit: Illustrated London News The obituary of Robert William Thomson as it appeared in the Illustrated London News on 29 March 1873. Thomson was the inventor of the pneumatic tyre, the elliptic rotary steam engine and locomotive traction engine, the portable steam crane, and numerous other inventions. The obituary preceding his is for Evelyn Denison, 1st Viscount Ossington. More selected portraits Image 8 Mark RuttePhoto: Nick van Ormondt Mark Rutte is (as of 2011) the incumbent Prime Minister of the Netherlands. He has been the leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) party since 2006. In the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in their occupying 31 of the 150 seats in the House of Representatives. When he was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal Prime Minister in the Netherlands in 92 years. More selected portraits Image 9 Louis PasteurPhotograph: Nadar; restoration: Chris Woodrich Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) was a French chemist and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation and pasteurization. He reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His medical discoveries provided direct support for the germ theory of disease and its application in clinical medicine. Together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch, he is regarded as one of the three main founders of bacteriology. More selected portraits Image 10 Alexz JohnsonPhoto: Epitome Pictures Alexz Johnson (b. 1986) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and actress, best known for roles as Jude Harrison in the CTV series Instant Star (character shown here), Annie Thelan in the Disney Channel series So Weird, and as Erin Ulmer in the 2006 horror film Final Destination 3. Her album Voodoo was released in 2010. More selected portraits Image 11 Wayne GretzkyPhoto credit: Håkan Dahlström Ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky, as a member of the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL) in 1997. Gretzky, nicknamed "The Great One", is widely considered the best hockey player of all time. Upon his retirement in 1999, he held forty regular-season records, fifteen playoff records, and six All-Star records. He is the only NHL player to total over 200 points in one season—a feat he accomplished four times. In addition, he tallied over 100 points in 15 NHL seasons, 13 of them consecutively. He is the only player to have his number (99) officially retired by the NHL for all teams. More selected portraits Image 12 Enoch PowellPhotograph: Allan Warren Enoch Powell (1912–98), a professor of Ancient Greek by age 25 and brigadier during World War II, took up politics in the late 1940s and in the 1960s was selected for several cabinet positions. In 1968, he gave the "Rivers of Blood" speech about the dangers of immigration to the United Kingdom and of proposed anti-discrimination legislation. More selected portraits Image 13 K. T. ThomasPhotograph credit: Augustus Binu K. T. Thomas (born 30 January 1937) is a former judge of the Supreme Court of India, known for his strong opinions on Indian socio-political matters. He was selected as a district and sessions judge in 1977, and became a judge of the Kerala High Court in 1985. A decade later, he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court, on which he served until retiring in 2002. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Indian government in 2007 for services in the field of social affairs. More selected portraits Image 14 Nataliya GotsiyPhoto credit: Peter Duhon Ukrainian fashion model Nataliya Gotsiy modeling for Cynthia Rowley, Spring 2007 New York Fashion Week. She was the winner of the Ford Supermodel of the World 2004 search. She has appeared on the cover of French Elle and Italian Marie Claire and modeled for Behnaz Sarafpour, Christian Lacroix, Diane von Furstenberg, Dior, Dolce & Gabbana, Dries van Noten, Gucci, Oscar de la Renta, Valentino, and Vivienne Westwood, among others. More selected portraits Image 15 Alice PaulPhotograph credit: Harris & Ewing; restored by Adam Cuerden Alice Paul was an American suffragist, feminist, and women's-rights activist, and one of the main leaders and strategists of the campaign for the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits sex discrimination in the right to vote. Along with Lucy Burns and others, she strategized events such as the Woman Suffrage Procession and the Silent Sentinels as part of the successful campaign that resulted in the amendment's passage on August 18, 1920. This photograph of Paul was taken in 1915 by the Harris & Ewing photographic studio in Washington, D.C. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 24 Births 1632 - Baruch Spinoza, Dutch philosopher (d. 1677) 1784 - Zachary Taylor, 12th President of the United States (d. 1850) (pictured) 1849 - Frances Hodgson Burnett, British-born author (d. 1924) 1853 - Bat Masterson, American gunfighter (d. 1921) 1925 - William F. Buckley Jr., American writer (d. 2008) 1946 - Ted Bundy, American serial killer (d. 1989) Deaths 1957 - Diego Rivera, Mexican painter (b. 1886) 1963 - Lee Harvey Oswald, accused assassin of John F. Kennedy (b. 1939) 1991 - Freddie Mercury, Zanzibar-born singer (Queen) (b. 1946) 2005 - Pat Morita, American actor (b. 1932) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 24 November 2021 – Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) 22 November 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) 21 November 2021 – 2021 Chilean general election Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Updated: 21:33, 24 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "Not one of us knows what effect his life produces, and what he gives to others; that is hidden from us and must remain so, though we are often allowed to see some little fraction of it, so that we may not lose courage." — Albert Schweitzer In The Spiritual Life, 1947 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Biography Portal:Biography - Wikipedia Portal:Biography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Biography Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Biography Portal Lives of the Artists A biography, or simply bio, is a detailed description of a person's life. It involves more than just the basic facts like education, work, relationships, and death; it portrays a person's experience of these life events. Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (résumé), a biography presents a subject's life story, highlighting various aspects of their life, including intimate details of experience, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality. Biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life. One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called legacy writing. Works in diverse media, from literature to film, form the genre known as biography. An authorized biography is written with the permission, cooperation, and at times, participation of a subject or a subject's heirs. An autobiography is written by the person themselves, sometimes with the assistance of a collaborator or ghostwriter. (Full article...) Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured biographies – load new batch Featured articles are displayed here, which represent some of the best content on English Wikipedia. Image 1 Harvey Bernard Milk (May 22, 1930 – November 27, 1978) was an American politician and the first openly gay elected official in the history of California, where he was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors. Although he was the most pro-LGBT politician in the United States at the time, politics and activism were not his early interests; he was neither open about his sexuality nor civically active until he was 40, after his experiences in the counterculture movement of the 1960s. In 1972, Milk moved from New York City to the Castro District of San Francisco amid a migration of gay and bisexual men. He took advantage of the growing political and economic power of the neighborhood to promote his interests and unsuccessfully ran three times for political office. Milk's theatrical campaigns earned him increasing popularity, and in 1977 he won a seat as a city supervisor. His election was made possible by a key component of a shift in San Francisco politics. (Full article...) Image 2 Shepard in 1971 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. (November 18, 1923 – July 21, 1998) was an American astronaut, naval aviator, test pilot, and businessman. In 1961, he became the second person and the first American to travel into space, and in 1971, he walked on the Moon. A graduate of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Shepard saw action with the surface navy during World War II. He became a naval aviator in 1946, and a test pilot in 1950. He was selected as one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts in 1959, and in May 1961 he made the first crewed Project Mercury flight, Mercury-Redstone 3, in a spacecraft he named Freedom 7. His craft entered space, but was not capable of achieving orbit. He became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space, and the first space traveler to manually control the orientation of his craft. In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission. He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B Freedom 7 II in honor of his first spacecraft, but the mission was canceled. (Full article...) Image 3 Jason Sendwe (1917 – 19 June 1964) was a Congolese politician and a leader of the Association Générale des Baluba du Katanga (BALUBAKAT) party. He served as Second Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Republic of the Congo) from August 1961 until January 1963, and as President of the Province of North Katanga from September 1963 until his death, with a brief interruption. Sendwe was born in 1917 in Mwanya, Kabongo Territory, Belgian Congo, to a Baluba family. He was educated in Methodist schools and nursing institutions. Unable to become a doctor due to a lack of medical schools in the Congo, he found work as a minister, teacher, and nurse. He became involved in several cultural organisations, and in 1957 founded BALUBAKAT to fight for the interests of the Baluba. He espoused nationalism and believed that the Congo should remain a united country after Belgian rule. In May 1960, shortly before the country's independence, he was elected to the newly constituted Chamber of Deputies. Sendwe sought to obtain control over the government of Katanga Province, but lost a power struggle against his rival, Moïse Tshombe, and the Confédération des associations tribales du Katanga (CONAKAT) party. Regardless, Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba nominated him for the office of State Commissioner for Katanga. (Full article...) Image 4 Hattie Jacques (/d?e?ks/; born Josephine Edwina Jaques; 7 February 1922 – 6 October 1980) was an English comedy actress of stage, radio and screen. She is best known as a regular of the Carry On films, where she typically played strict, no-nonsense characters, but was also a prolific television and radio performer. Jacques started her career in 1944 with an appearance at the Players' Theatre in London, but came to national prominence through her appearances on three highly popular radio series on the BBC: with Tommy Handley on It's That Man Again; with ventriloquist Peter Brough on Educating Archie; and then with Tony Hancock on Hancock's Half Hour. After the Second World War Jacques made her cinematic debut in Green for Danger (1946), in which she had a brief, uncredited role. From 1958 to 1974 she appeared in 14 Carry On films, playing various roles including the formidable hospital matron. On television she had a long professional partnership with Eric Sykes, with whom she co-starred in his long-running series Sykes and Sykes and a.... The role endeared her to the public and the two became staples of British television. (Full article...) Image 5 Leslie Groves, pictured here as a major general. Lieutenant General Leslie Richard Groves Jr. (17 August 1896 – 13 July 1970) was a United States Army Corps of Engineers officer who oversaw the construction of the Pentagon and directed the Manhattan Project, a top secret research project that developed the atomic bomb during World War II. The son of a U.S. Army chaplain, Groves lived at various Army posts during his childhood. In 1918, he graduated fourth in his class at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and was commissioned into the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. In 1929, he went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition to conduct a survey for the Inter-Oceanic Nicaragua Canal. Following the 1931 earthquake, Groves took over Managua's water supply system, for which he was awarded the Nicaraguan Presidential Medal of Merit. He attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1935 and 1936; and the Army War College in 1938 and 1939, after which he was posted to the War Department General Staff. Groves developed "a reputation as a doer, a driver, and a stickler for duty" and in 1940 he became special assistant for construction to the Quartermaster General, tasked with inspecting construction sites and checking on their progress. In August 1941, he was appointed to create the gigantic office complex for the War Department's 40,000 staff that would ultimately become the Pentagon. (Full article...) Image 6 The LaRouche criminal trials in the mid-1980s stemmed from federal and state investigations into the activities of American political activist Lyndon LaRouche and members of his movement. They were charged with conspiring to commit fraud and soliciting loans they had no intention of repaying. LaRouche and his supporters disputed the charges, claiming the trials were politically motivated. In 1986, hundreds of state and federal officers raided LaRouche offices in Virginia and Massachusetts. A federal grand jury in Boston, Massachusetts, indicted LaRouche and 12 associates on credit card fraud and obstruction of justice. The subsequent trial, described as an "extravaganza", was repeatedly delayed and ended in mistrial. Following the mistrial, a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Virginia, indicted LaRouche and six associates. After a short trial in 1988, LaRouche was convicted of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud, and tax evasion, and was sentenced to prison for fifteen years. He entered prison in 1989 and was paroled five years later. At the same trial, his associates received lesser sentences for mail fraud and conspiracy. In separate state trials in Virginia and New York, 13 associates received terms ranging from one month to 77 years. The Virginia state trials were described as the highest-profile cases that the state Attorney General's office had ever prosecuted. Fourteen states issued injunctions against LaRouche-related organizations. Three LaRouche-related organizations were forced into bankruptcy after failing to pay contempt of court fines. (Full article...) Image 7 Marjorie Cameron Parsons Kimmel (April 23, 1922 – July 24, 1995), who professionally used the mononym Cameron, was an American artist, poet, actress and occultist. A follower of Thelema, the new religious movement established by the English occultist Aleister Crowley, she was married to rocket pioneer and fellow Thelemite Jack Parsons. Born in Belle Plaine, Iowa, Cameron volunteered for service in the United States Navy during the Second World War, after which she settled in Pasadena, California. There she met Parsons, who believed her to be the "elemental" woman that he had invoked in the early stages of a series of sex magic rituals called the Babalon Working. They entered into a relationship and were married in 1946. Their relationship was often strained, although Parsons sparked her involvement in Thelema and occultism. After Parsons' death in an explosion at their home in 1952, Cameron came to suspect that her husband had been assassinated and began rituals to communicate with his spirit. Moving to Beaumont, she established a multi-racial occult group called The Children, which dedicated itself to sex magic rituals with the intent of producing mixed-race "moon children" who would be devoted to the god Horus. The group soon dissolved, largely because many of its members became concerned by Cameron's increasingly apocalyptic predictions. (Full article...) Image 8 August Meyszner wearing the rank of SS-Oberführer in 1938 August Edler von Meyszner (3 August 1886 – 24 January 1947) was an Austrian Gendarmerie officer, right-wing politician, and senior Ordnungspolizei (order police) officer who held the post of Higher SS and Police Leader in the German-occupied territory of Serbia from January 1942 to March 1944, during World War II. He has been described as one of Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler's most brutal subordinates. Meyszner began his career as an officer in the Gendarmerie, served on the Italian Front during World War I and reached the rank of Major der Polizei by 1921. He joined the Austrian Nazi Party in September 1925 and became a right-wing parliamentary deputy and provincial minister in the Austrian province of Styria in 1930. Due to his involvement with the Nazis, Meyszner was forcibly retired in 1933 and arrested in February 1934, but released after three months at the Wöllersdorf concentration camp. That July, he was rearrested following an attempted coup, but escaped police custody and fled to Nazi Germany, where he joined the Ordnungspolizei (Orpo) and then the Allgemeine SS. After police postings in Austria, Germany and occupied Norway, Himmler appointed Meyszner as Higher SS and Police Leader in Serbia in early 1942. He was one of few Orpo officers to be appointed to such a role. (Full article...) Image 9 Sir James Chadwick, CH, FRS (20 October 1891 – 24 July 1974) was a British physicist who was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of the neutron in 1932. In 1941, he wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report, which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts. He was the head of the British team that worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II. He was knighted in Britain in 1945 for his achievements in physics. Chadwick graduated from the Victoria University of Manchester in 1911, where he studied under Ernest Rutherford (known as the "father of nuclear physics"). At Manchester, he continued to study under Rutherford until he was awarded his MSc in 1913. The same year, Chadwick was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851. He elected to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger in Berlin. Using Geiger's recently developed Geiger counter, Chadwick was able to demonstrate that beta radiation produced a continuous spectrum, and not discrete lines as had been thought. Still in Germany when World War I broke out in Europe, he spent the next four years in the Ruhleben internment camp. (Full article...) Image 10 Billings Learned Hand (/?l??rn?d/ LURN-id; January 27, 1872 – August 18, 1961) was an American jurist, lawyer, and judicial philosopher. He served as a federal trial judge on the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York and later as an appellate judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Born and raised in Albany, New York, Hand majored in philosophy at Harvard College and graduated with honors from Harvard Law School. After a short career as a lawyer in Albany and New York City, he was appointed at the age of 37 as a Federal District Judge in Manhattan in 1909. The profession suited his detached and open-minded temperament, and his decisions soon won him a reputation for craftsmanship and authority. Between 1909 and 1914, under the influence of Herbert Croly's social theories, Hand supported New Nationalism. He ran unsuccessfully as the Progressive Party's candidate for Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals in 1913, but withdrew from active politics shortly afterwards. In 1924, President Calvin Coolidge promoted Hand to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which he went on to lead as the Senior Circuit Judge (later retitled Chief Judge) from 1939 until his semi-retirement in 1951. Scholars have recognized the Second Circuit under Hand as one of the finest appeals courts in the country's history. Friends and admirers often lobbied for Hand's promotion to the Supreme Court, but circumstances and his political past conspired against his appointment. (Full article...) Image 11 Margaret Lea Houston, c. 1839 Margaret Lea Houston (April 11, 1819 – December 3, 1867) was First Lady of the Republic of Texas during her husband Sam Houston's second term as President of the Republic of Texas. They met following the first of his two non-consecutive terms as the Republic's president, and married when he was a representative in the Congress of the Republic of Texas. She was his third wife, remaining with him until his death. She came from a close-knit family in Alabama, many of whom also moved to Texas when she married the man who was an accomplished politician in both Tennessee and Texas, and who had won the Battle of San Jacinto during the Texas Revolution. The couple had eight children, and she gave birth to most of them while he was away attending to politics. Her mother Nancy Lea was a constant in their lives, helping with the children, managing the household help, and always providing either financial assistance or temporary housing. With the help of her extended family in Texas, Margaret convinced her husband to give up both alcohol and profane language. He believed his wife to be an exemplary woman of faith and, under her influence, converted to the Baptist denomination, after he had many years earlier been baptized a Catholic in Nacogdoches, Texas. (Full article...) Image 12 Joseph Havens Richards SJ (born Havens Cowles Richards; November 8, 1851 – June 9, 1923) was an American Catholic priest and Jesuit who became a prominent president of Georgetown University, where he instituted major reforms and significantly enhanced the quality and stature of the university. Born to a prominent Ohio family, his father was an Episcopal priest who controversially converted to Catholicism and had the infant Richards secretly baptized as a Catholic. Richards became the president of Georgetown University in 1888 and undertook significant construction, such as the completion of Healy Hall, which included work on Gaston Hall and Riggs Library, and the building of Dahlgren Chapel. Richards sought to transform Georgetown into a modern, comprehensive university. To that end, he bolstered the graduate programs, expanded the School of Medicine and Law School , established the Georgetown University Hospital, improved the astronomical observatory, and recruited prominent faculty. He also navigated tensions with the newly established Catholic University of America, which was located in the same city. Richards fought anti-Catholic discrimination by Ivy League universities, resulting in Harvard Law School admitting graduates of some Jesuit universities. (Full article...) Image 13 Turner in the 1890s Emma Louisa Turner or E L Turner FLS, FZS, HMBOU (9 June 1867 – 13 August 1940) was an English ornithologist and pioneering bird photographer. Turner took up photography at age 34, after meeting the wildlife photographer Richard Kearton. She joined the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) in 1901, and by 1904 she had started to give talks illustrated with her own photographic slides; by 1908, when aged 41, she was established as a professional lecturer. Turner spent part of each year in Norfolk, and her 1911 image of a nestling bittern in Norfolk was the first evidence of the species' return to the United Kingdom as a breeding bird after its local extinction in the late 19th century. She also travelled widely in the United Kingdom and abroad photographing birds. (Full article...) Image 14 Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd's name in Arabic calligraphy Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi Ubayd al-Thaqafi (Arabic: ??????????? ???? ????? ??????? ????????????, al-Mukht?r ibn Ab? ?Ubayd al-Thaqaf?y; c. 622 – 3 April 687) was a pro-Alid revolutionary based in Kufa, who led a rebellion against the Umayyad Caliphate in 685 and ruled over most of Iraq for eighteen months during the Second Fitna. Born in Ta'if, Mukhtar moved to Iraq at a young age and grew up in Kufa. Following the death of Husayn ibn Ali, a grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, at the hands of the Umayyad army in the Battle of Karbala in 680, he allied with the rival caliph Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr in Mecca, but the alliance was short-lived. Mukhtar returned to Kufa where he declared Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, a son of caliph Ali (r. 656–661) and brother of Husayn, the mahdi and the imam, and called for the establishment of an Alid caliphate and retaliation for Husayn's killing. He took over Kufa in October 685, after expelling its Zubayrid governor, and later ordered the execution of those involved in the killing of Husayn. Hostile relations with Ibn al-Zubayr ultimately led to Mukhtar's death by the forces of the Zubayrid governor of Basra, Mus'ab ibn al-Zubayr, following a four-month siege. (Full article...) Image 15 Engraving of Percy Thomas Percy (c.?1560 – 8 November 1605) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605. A tall, physically impressive man, little is known of his early life beyond his matriculation in 1579 at the University of Cambridge, and his marriage in 1591 to Martha Wright. In 1596 his second cousin once removed, Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland, appointed him constable of Alnwick Castle and made him responsible for the Percy family's northern estates. He served the earl in the Low Countries in about 1600–1601, and in the years before 1603 was his intermediary in a series of confidential communications with King James VI of Scotland. Following James's accession to the English throne in 1603, Percy became disenchanted with the new king, who he supposed had reneged on his promises of toleration for English Catholics. His meeting in June 1603 with Robert Catesby, a religious zealot similarly unimpressed with the new royal Stuart dynasty, led the following year to his joining Catesby's conspiracy to kill the king and his ministers by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder. Percy helped fund the group and secured the leases to certain properties in London, one of which was the undercroft directly beneath the House of Lords, in which the gunpowder was finally placed. The conspirators also planned to instigate an uprising in the Midlands and to simultaneously kidnap James's daughter, Princess Elizabeth. Percy was to remain in London and secure the capture of her brother, Prince Henry. (Full article...) More featured articles Did you know... - show different entries ... that Swedish painter, ceramist, designer, and writer Tyra Lundgren was one of the most versatile artists of the 20th century? ... that Francis Dzierozynski's dispute with Archbishop Ambrose Maréchal over land ownership in Maryland escalated to involve Pope Pius VII and two U.S. secretaries of state? ... that Swedish actor Christopher Wollter started his career as a teenage reporter for the SVT children's television show Barnjournalen? ... that after surviving the Holocaust, writer Trudi Birger moved to Israel with her family and founded a non-profit dental clinic? ... that President Barack Obama celebrated his 50th birthday by playing basketball with Shane Battier, LeBron James, Magic Johnson, Maya Moore, Alonzo Mourning, Joakim Noah, Chris Paul, and Derrick Rose? ... that the 2017 Bishop Maginn High School baseball team largely consisted of Karen refugees? ... that Flying Apsaras Award winner Tian Chengren worked as an actor until the age of 92? ... that three members of the Harrison family of Virginia served as President of the United States? ... that at the age of 12, the Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse became the youngest ever Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo Calf Pipe and Bundle? ... that Ugandan president Idi Amin reportedly shot dead the leader of the Arube uprising when the latter tried to arrest him? ... that Swedish writer Annie Åkerhielm was an active campaigner against women's suffrage and democracy? ... that a line from the 1899 poem "Sympathy" provided the title for Maya Angelou's autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings? General images The following are images from various biography-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1Saint Augustine of Hippo wrote Confessions, the first Western autobiography ever written, around 400. Portrait by Philippe de Champaigne, 17th century. (from Autobiography) Image 2Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793 (from Autobiography) Image 3James Boswell wrote what many consider to be the first modern biography, The Life of Samuel Johnson, in 1791. (from Biography) Image 4A scene from the Baburnama (from Autobiography) Image 5Einhard as scribe (from Biography) Image 6John Foxe's The Book of Martyrs, was one of the earliest English-language biographies. (from Biography) Image 7Eminent Victorians set the standard for 20th century biographical writing, when it was published in 1918. (from Biography) Image 8Third Volume of a 1727 edition of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans printed by Jacob Tonson (from Biography) Need help? Do you have a question about Wikipedia biographical content that you can't find the answer to? Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk. Get involved For editor resources and to collaborate with other editors on improving Wikipedia's Biography-related articles, see WikiProject Biography. Selected portrait Image 1 Vincent van GoghPainting credit: John Russell Vincent van Gogh is an oil-on-canvas portrait by Australian painter John Russell, dated 1886. It depicts Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, who became lifelong friends with Russell after meeting him at Fernand Cormon's atelier in Paris, which they both attended. Painted in a realist and academic manner, the portrait shows hints of the impressionist techniques with which they began experimenting in the latter half of the 1880s. It is the earliest of three portraits painted of Van Gogh by his contemporaries, the other two being Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887) and Paul Gauguin's The Painter of Sunflowers (1888). Van Gogh seems to have been particularly attached to Russell's portrait, which Russell gifted to him as a mark of their friendship. The painting passed from Van Gogh to his brother Theo and then to their family; it is now in the collection of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam. More selected portraits Image 2 Jean-Baptiste CarpeauxImage credit: The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux was a 19th-century French sculptor and painter who sought to inject movement and spontaneity into his works. This engraving, done to commemorate him after his death, shows his sculpture Flore below him, and others of his works above. In his time, some of his works, particularly La Danse, were criticised as indecent, but today his sculptures are exhibited in major museums of art worldwide. More selected portraits Image 3 Walt WhitmanPhotograph: George C. Cox; restoration: Adam Cuerden Walt Whitman (1819–1892) was an American poet, essayist and journalist. A humanist, he was a part of the transition between transcendentalism and realism, incorporating both views in his works. Whitman is among the most influential poets in the American canon, often called the father of free verse. His work was very controversial in its time, particularly his poetry collection Leaves of Grass (first published in 1855, but continuously revised until Whitman's death), which was described as obscene for its overt sexuality. More selected portraits Image 4 Pedro II of BrazilPhoto: Mathew Brady/Levin Corbin Handy Emperor of Brazil Pedro II was the second and last ruler of the Empire of Brazil, reigning for over 58 years. Born in Rio de Janeiro, his father Pedro I's abrupt abdication and flight to Europe in 1831 left him as Emperor at the age of five. Inheriting an Empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II turned Brazil into an emerging power in the international arena. On November 15, 1889, he was overthrown in a coup d'état by a clique of military leaders who declared Brazil a republic. However, he had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support, and did not support any attempt to restore the monarchy. More selected portraits Image 5 Aminah CendrakasihPhotograph credit: Tati Studio; restored by Chris Woodrich Aminah Cendrakasih (born 29 January 1938) is an Indonesian actress. She started in films in her teens, her first starring role being in 1955. She continued acting into her seventies, appearing in almost 120 feature films during her career, as well as in several television roles. In 2012, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Bandung Film Festival, and received another at the 2013 Indonesian Movie Awards. More selected portraits Image 6 Jeff DunhamPhotograph: Richard Mclaren American ventriloquist and stand-up comedian Jeff Dunham with his puppet "Achmed the Dead Terrorist". Dunham, whose puppets Time magazine has described as "politically incorrect, gratuitously insulting and ill tempered", uses Achmed to satirize terrorists. More selected portraits Image 7 Robert William ThomsonImage credit: Illustrated London News The obituary of Robert William Thomson as it appeared in the Illustrated London News on 29 March 1873. Thomson was the inventor of the pneumatic tyre, the elliptic rotary steam engine and locomotive traction engine, the portable steam crane, and numerous other inventions. The obituary preceding his is for Evelyn Denison, 1st Viscount Ossington. More selected portraits Image 8 Mark RuttePhoto: Nick van Ormondt Mark Rutte is (as of 2011) the incumbent Prime Minister of the Netherlands. He has been the leader of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) party since 2006. In the 2010 general election, the VVD won the highest number of votes cast, resulting in their occupying 31 of the 150 seats in the House of Representatives. When he was sworn in on 14 October 2010, he became the first liberal Prime Minister in the Netherlands in 92 years. More selected portraits Image 9 Louis PasteurPhotograph: Nadar; restoration: Chris Woodrich Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) was a French chemist and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation and pasteurization. He reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His medical discoveries provided direct support for the germ theory of disease and its application in clinical medicine. Together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch, he is regarded as one of the three main founders of bacteriology. More selected portraits Image 10 Alexz JohnsonPhoto: Epitome Pictures Alexz Johnson (b. 1986) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and actress, best known for roles as Jude Harrison in the CTV series Instant Star (character shown here), Annie Thelan in the Disney Channel series So Weird, and as Erin Ulmer in the 2006 horror film Final Destination 3. Her album Voodoo was released in 2010. More selected portraits Image 11 Wayne GretzkyPhoto credit: Håkan Dahlström Ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky, as a member of the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL) in 1997. Gretzky, nicknamed "The Great One", is widely considered the best hockey player of all time. Upon his retirement in 1999, he held forty regular-season records, fifteen playoff records, and six All-Star records. He is the only NHL player to total over 200 points in one season—a feat he accomplished four times. In addition, he tallied over 100 points in 15 NHL seasons, 13 of them consecutively. He is the only player to have his number (99) officially retired by the NHL for all teams. More selected portraits Image 12 Enoch PowellPhotograph: Allan Warren Enoch Powell (1912–98), a professor of Ancient Greek by age 25 and brigadier during World War II, took up politics in the late 1940s and in the 1960s was selected for several cabinet positions. In 1968, he gave the "Rivers of Blood" speech about the dangers of immigration to the United Kingdom and of proposed anti-discrimination legislation. More selected portraits Image 13 K. T. ThomasPhotograph credit: Augustus Binu K. T. Thomas (born 30 January 1937) is a former judge of the Supreme Court of India, known for his strong opinions on Indian socio-political matters. He was selected as a district and sessions judge in 1977, and became a judge of the Kerala High Court in 1985. A decade later, he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court, on which he served until retiring in 2002. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Indian government in 2007 for services in the field of social affairs. More selected portraits Image 14 Nataliya GotsiyPhoto credit: Peter Duhon Ukrainian fashion model Nataliya Gotsiy modeling for Cynthia Rowley, Spring 2007 New York Fashion Week. She was the winner of the Ford Supermodel of the World 2004 search. She has appeared on the cover of French Elle and Italian Marie Claire and modeled for Behnaz Sarafpour, Christian Lacroix, Diane von Furstenberg, Dior, Dolce & Gabbana, Dries van Noten, Gucci, Oscar de la Renta, Valentino, and Vivienne Westwood, among others. More selected portraits Image 15 Alice PaulPhotograph credit: Harris & Ewing; restored by Adam Cuerden Alice Paul was an American suffragist, feminist, and women's-rights activist, and one of the main leaders and strategists of the campaign for the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits sex discrimination in the right to vote. Along with Lucy Burns and others, she strategized events such as the Woman Suffrage Procession and the Silent Sentinels as part of the successful campaign that resulted in the amendment's passage on August 18, 1920. This photograph of Paul was taken in 1915 by the Harris & Ewing photographic studio in Washington, D.C. More selected portraits edit  On this day – November 24 Births 1632 - Baruch Spinoza, Dutch philosopher (d. 1677) 1784 - Zachary Taylor, 12th President of the United States (d. 1850) (pictured) 1849 - Frances Hodgson Burnett, British-born author (d. 1924) 1853 - Bat Masterson, American gunfighter (d. 1921) 1925 - William F. Buckley Jr., American writer (d. 2008) 1946 - Ted Bundy, American serial killer (d. 1989) Deaths 1957 - Diego Rivera, Mexican painter (b. 1886) 1963 - Lee Harvey Oswald, accused assassin of John F. Kennedy (b. 1939) 1991 - Freddie Mercury, Zanzibar-born singer (Queen) (b. 1946) 2005 - Pat Morita, American actor (b. 1932) More of today's anniversaries... In the news 24 November 2021 – Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) 22 November 2021 – Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) 21 November 2021 – 2021 Chilean general election Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) 18 November 2021 – 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Updated: 21:33, 24 November 2021 edit  Quote of the week "Not one of us knows what effect his life produces, and what he gives to others; that is hidden from us and must remain so, though we are often allowed to see some little fraction of it, so that we may not lose courage." — Albert Schweitzer In The Spiritual Life, 1947 Archive – More from Wikiquote edit  Related portals Law Politics Literature Music Science Sports Military Religion Islam Christianity LGBT Hinduism Judaism Human sexuality Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Biography (genre) Biography awards Biographers Biography journals Biographical museums Oral history Person databases The Biography Channel shows Biographical works People People by association People by behavior People by event People by gender People by language People by medical or psychological condition People by nationality People by occupation People by organization People by location People by political orientation People by religion People by role People by sexuality People by status People by time Categories by individual People categories by type Lists of people Outlines of people Award winners Bibliographies of people Biography (genre) Classification of people Personal coats of arms Depictions of people Fictional characters Legendary people Metaphors referring to people Articles about multiple people Mythological people Twin people People stubs Wikipedia categories named after people edit  Recognized content Featured articles 1937 tour of Germany by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor DJ AM Aaliyah Lazarus Aaronson Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan Abu Nidal Chinua Achebe Eliza Acton John Adair Amy Adams Doc Adams John Adams Samuel Adams Nick Adenhart Áedán mac Gabráin Ælfheah of Canterbury Ælle of Sussex Æthelbald of Mercia Æthelbald, King of Wessex Æthelberht, King of Wessex Æthelberht of Kent Æthelflæd Æthelred I, King of Wessex Æthelred, Lord of the Mercians Æthelred of Mercia Æthelstan A Æthelstan Æthelwold ætheling Æthelwulf, King of Wessex Ben Affleck Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Sadruddin Aga Khan Jonathan Agnew Spiro Agnew Ahmose I Sonam Kapoor Mukhtar al-Thaqafi Albert, Prince Consort Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale Alboin Leelah Alcorn Aldfrith of Northumbria Buzz Aldrin Alexander II Zabinas Alexander of Lincoln Raymond Pace Alexander Alexander of Greece Alexandra of Denmark Hadji Ali Princess Alice of Battenberg Alice in Chains Charles-Valentin Alkan Gubby Allen Ike Altgens Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias Tommy Amaker Herman Vandenburg Ames Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Anna Anderson William T. Anderson Mário de Andrade Maya Angelou Anna of East Anglia Anne of Denmark Anne, Queen of Great Britain Mary Anning Anthony Roll Antiochus XII Dionysus Marshall Applewhite Yasser Arafat Harriet Arbuthnot Archimedes Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll Lilias Armstrong Neil Armstrong Chester A. Arthur King Arthur Albert Stanley, 1st Baron Ashfield Shooting of James Ashley Elias Ashmole Andjar Asmara Aspasia Asser Asylum confinement of Christopher Smart Charles Atangana Atlanersa Attalus I James T. Aubrey Audioslave Augustine of Canterbury Augustus Alice Ayres Ba C?t Kroger Babb Walter Bache Alexis Bachelot Peter Badcoe Ivan Bagramyan Hobey Baker James Robert Baker Thomas Baker (aviator) Vidya Balan Baldwin of Forde Christian Bale Albert Ball John Balmer George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore Honoré de Balzac Eric Bana Bronwyn Bancroft Edward Mitchell Bannister Ann Bannon Alexandre Banza Joseph Barbera John Barbirolli Alben W. Barkley William Barley Sid Barnes Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Natalie Clifford Barney Nicky Barr Richard Barre John Barrymore Basiliscus Cyril Bassett Arnold Bax Thomas F. Bayard Hugh Beadle The Beatles Felice Beato Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom Kevin Beattie Otto Becher J. C. W. Beckham Thomas Beecham Isabella Beeton Bix Beiderbecke Mary Bell (aviator) Jean Bellette Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and the Belyayev circle Judah P. Benjamin Shelton Benjamin William Sterndale Bennett Beorhtwulf of Mercia Moe Berg Gottlob Berger Hector Berlioz Frank Berryman John W. Beschter Biddenden Maids Big Star Steve Biko Golding Bird Norman Birkett, 1st Baron Birkett Georges Bizet Black Francis Blackbeard Arthur Blackburn Luke P. Blackburn Frank Bladin James G. Blaine Thomas Blamey Sophie Blanchard Enid Blyton Bodashtart R. V. C. Bodley Barthélemy Boganda Niels Bohr Jean Bolikango John F. Bolt Margaret Bondfield Stede Bonnet William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville Daniel Boone Brian Booth William Borah Carsten Borchgrevink Frank Borman Bernard Bosanquet (cricketer) Oliver Bosbyshell Harriet Bosse William Bostock Horatio Bottomley Adrian Boult Matthew Boulton Luc Bourdon David Bowie James Bowie William D. Boyce James E. Boyd (scientist) Juan Davis Bradburn Bessie Braddock Guy Bradley William O'Connell Bradley Don Bradman Don Bradman with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Caroline Brady (philologist) Lester Brain Joel Brand William M. Branham John C. Breckinridge Political career of John C. Breckinridge Matthew Brettingham Eric Brewer (ice hockey) William Brill (RAAF officer) Benjamin Britten Isaac Brock Martin Brodeur Neil Brooks Bill Brown (cricketer) Donald Forrester Brown Jesse L. Brown John Y. Brown (politician, born 1835) William Robinson Brown Raymond Brownell Stanley Bruce Steve Bruce William Bruce (architect) William Speirs Bruce Avery Brundage Louise Bryant Martin Bucer Humphrey Stafford, 1st Duke of Buckingham Simon Bolivar Buckner David Hillhouse Buel (priest) William Burges Guy Burgess Burke and Hare murders Robert Burnell Macfarlane Burnet Henry Cornelius Burnett Henry Burrell (admiral) William Henry Bury The Bus Uncle Alan Bush James Wood Bush Vannevar Bush Josephine Butler Pedro Álvares Cabral Cædwalla of Wessex Cai Lun William de St-Calais William Calcraft John C. Calhoun John Calvin Marjorie Cameron Elizabeth Canning Richard Cantillon Georg Cantor Mike Capel Rudolf Caracciola Neville Cardus Mariah Carey Caroline of Ansbach Charles Carroll the Settler Rachel Carson Rudolph Cartier Nancy Cartwright Finn M. W. Caspersen Carlos Castillo Armas Robert Catesby Catherine de' Medici Ceawlin of Wessex James Chadwick Roger B. Chaffee Neville Chamberlain Rise of Neville Chamberlain Happy Chandler Charlie Chaplin Percy Chapman Ian Chappell Charles I of England Charles I of Anjou Charles II of England Jessica Chastain Harry Chauvel Robert de Chesney V. Gordon Childe Choe Bu Frédéric Chopin Priyanka Chopra Murray Chotiner Chrisye Colley Cibber Clarence 13X Wesley Clark Dudley Clarke Rebecca Clarke (composer) Clement of Dunblane Cleopatra Death of Cleopatra Cleopatra Selene of Syria Grover Cleveland Henry Clifford, 10th Baron Clifford Kim Clijsters Cliff Clinkscales Hillary Clinton Harry Cobby Jane Cobden Coenred of Mercia Coenwulf of Mercia Adrian Cole (RAAF officer) Paul Collingwood A. E. J. Collins Martha Layne Collins Michael Collins (astronaut) Bert Combs James B. Conant Constantine II of Scotland Learie Constantine Henry Conwell William Cooley Calvin Coolidge Bradley Cooper D. B. Cooper Gary Cooper John Sherman Cooper Edward Drinker Cope William de Corbeil Richard Cordray Walter de Coutances Stan Coveleski Walter de Coventre Noël Coward William Cragh Ian Craig Stephen Crane Thomas Cranmer Jack Crawford (cricketer) O. G. S. Crawford Tom Crean (explorer) Dick Cresswell Thomas Crisp John J. Crittenden Ben Crosby C. R. M. F. Cruttwell Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope Urse d'Abetot Roderic Dallas Damageplan Edward Thomas Daniell Richard Dannatt Charles Darwin Homer Davenport Phillip Davey David I of Scotland Elizabeth David Harold Davidson Randall Davidson Russell T Davies S. O. Davies George Andrew Davis Jr. Jefferson Davis Emily Davison John Day (printer) Claude Debussy Frederick Delius Demosthenes Bill Denny Tom Derrick Joseph Desha Hermann Detzner Deusdedit of Canterbury Emily Dickinson John Diefenbaker Diocletian Walt Disney Benjamin Disraeli D. Djajakusuma Djedkare Isesi Mom?ilo ?uji? Steve Dodd Charles Domery Domitian Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick James A. Doonan John Doubleday (restorer) Alec Douglas-Home John Douglas (architect) Marjory Stoneman Douglas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Neal Dow Roy Dowling Nick Drake Uroš Drenovi? Tom Driberg Montague Druitt Peter Drummond (RAF officer) Vance Drummond W. E. B. Du Bois Du Fu Thích Qu?ng ??c Charles Duke Tim Duncan Bud Dunn Kirsten Dunst Don Dunstan Pavle ?uriši? Killing of Muhammad al-Durrah Bob Dylan Eadbald of Kent Ealdred (archbishop of York) Eardwulf of Northumbria John Early (educator) Bobby Eaton Brian Eaton Charles Eaton (RAAF officer) Isabelle Eberhardt Ecgberht, King of Wessex Adam Eckfeldt Edmund I Edward II of England Edward III of England Edward VI Edward VII Edward VIII Edward the Elder Duncan Edwards Henry Edwards (entomologist) Monroe Edwards Michael Francis Egan Jürgen Ehlers Edward Elgar Elizabeth I Elizabeth II Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Thomas Ellison Ernest Emerson Ray Emery William Hayden English Epaminondas Antiochus XI Epiphanes Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover Thomas Erpingham William Etty Demetrius III Eucaerus Leonhard Euler Antiochus X Eusebes David Evans (RAAF officer) Edmund Evans Hiram Wesley Evans Peter Evans (swimmer) Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Neil Hamilton Fairley Family of Gediminas Bernard Fanning Richie Farmer Ray Farquharson Adolfo Farsari Gabriel Fauré Guy Fawkes William Feiner Bob Feller Percy Fender Enrico Fermi Kathleen Ferrier Richard Feynman Nikita Filatov Millard Fillmore John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter Zelda Fitzgerald Pain fitzJohn Five Go Down to the Sea? Ian Fleming Ernie Fletcher Murder of Yvonne Fletcher Theoren Fleury Gilbert Foliot Joseph B. Foraker Wendell Ford George Formby George Formby Sr Georg Forster George Fox Terry Fox Rakoto Frah Anne Frank Ursula Franklin Frederick the Great Frederick III, German Emperor Robin Friday Caspar David Friedrich John Frusciante Florence Fuller Margaret Fuller Melville Fuller Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Dave Gallaher Ronnie Lee Gardner James A. Garfield Tyrone Garland Robert Garran James Garrard Ragnar Garrett William Garrow Ben Gascoigne Jacob Gens Geoffrey (archbishop of York) George I of Great Britain George I of Greece George II of Great Britain George III George IV George V George VI Prince George of Denmark Eddie Gerard Gerard (archbishop of York) Lisa del Giocondo Bobby Gibbes Stella Gibbons Josiah Willard Gibbs William Gibson John Gielgud W. S. Gilbert Adam Gilchrist Arthur Gilligan Nicolo Giraud Hannah Glasse John Glenn Harry Glicken Prince William, Duke of Gloucester Stanley Goble Godsmack Robert Goff, Baron Goff of Chieveley Vincent van Gogh Emma Goldman Michael Gomez E. Urner Goodman George Gosse George H. D. Gossip Arthur Gould (rugby union) Chris Gragg Otto Graham Percy Grainger Rachel Chiesley, Lady Grange Margaret Macpherson Grant Ulysses S. Grant Giovanni Antonio Grassi John de Gray El Greco Horace Greeley Charles Green (Australian soldier) Debora Green Stanley Green Herbert Greenfield Lady Gregory Wayne Gretzky Jane Grigson Joseph Grimaldi Rufus Wilmot Griswold Orval Grove Leslie Groves Rhys ap Gruffydd Bryan Gunn Jake Gyllenhaal Maggie Gyllenhaal H.D. Al-Hafiz James P. Hagerstrom Richard Hakluyt John Richard Clark Hall Ayumi Hamasaki Ron Hamence with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Wally Hammond Amir Hamzah Valston Hancock Winfield Scott Hancock Learned Hand Mark Hanna William Hanna Colin Hannah William Hardham Warren G. Harding Donald Hardman William Harper (Rhodesian politician) Benjamin Harrison Fairfax Harrison George Harrison William Henry Harrison Phil Hartman Francis Harvey Neil Harvey with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Dominik Hašek Lindsay Hassett with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Anne Hathaway Simon Hatley Eric A. Havelock Richard Hawes Ethan Hawke John Hay Rutherford B. Hayes Elwood Haynes Frank Headlam George Headley Patrick Francis Healy Charles Heaphy Reginald Heber Princess Helena of the United Kingdom John L. Helm William Hely Ernest Hemingway Paul Henderson Canadian drug charges and trial of Jimi Hendrix Death of Jimi Hendrix Jimi Hendrix Henry I of England Henry III of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry (bishop of Finland) Patrick Henry Thierry Henry George Went Hensley Katharine Hepburn George Herriman Edmund Herring Herbie Hewett Joe Hewitt (RAAF officer) Georgette Heyer Peter Heywood Hi-5 (Australian group) Hilary of Chichester Clem Hill Damon Hill Lynn Hill William Hillcourt Bernard Hinault Thomas C. Hindman Hippocrates George Hirst Garret Hobart Jack Hobbs Philip Seymour Hoffman Ima Hogg James Hogun Charles Holden Les Holden Disappearance of Natalee Holloway Stanley Holloway Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Gustav Holst Imogen Holst Michael Hordern Kenneth Horne Rogers Hornsby E. W. Hornung Brian Horrocks Nicholas Hoult House of Plantagenet Margaret Lea Houston Art Houtteman Juwan Howard C. D. Howe Robert Howe (Continental Army officer) Cedric Howell Hu Zhengyan Thomas J. Hudner Jr. Robert Hues Paterson Clarence Hughes Caesar Hull James Humphreys (pornographer) Josh Hutcherson Anne Hutchinson Len Hutton Hygeberht Jarome Iginla Fanny Imlay Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma Ine of Wessex Charles Inglis (engineer) Harold Innis Roy Inwood Irataba Isabeau of Bavaria Ismail I of Granada Hastings Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay Israel the Grammarian Satoru Iwata Andrew Jackson Archie Jackson Janet Jackson John Francis Jackson Michael Jackson Mike Jackson (British Army officer) Hattie Jacques James II of England James VI and I Jamiroquai Eusèbe Jaojoby Douglas Jardine Peter Jeffrey (RAAF officer) Frank Jenner Peter Jennings Jørgen Jensen (soldier) Jesus Derek Jeter Dobroslav Jev?evi? Muhammad Ali Jinnah Joan of Arc Jocelin of Glasgow Joehana Scarlett Johansson John Edward Brownlee as Attorney-General of Alberta John, King of England Andrew Johnson Ian Johnson (cricketer) Joseph Johnson (publisher) Keen Johnson Keith Johnson (cricket administrator) Magic Johnson Early life of Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson Andrew Johnston (singer) David A. Johnston John W. Johnston Angelina Jolie Murder of Dwayne Jones George Jones (RAAF officer) Peter Jones (missionary) Michael Jordan Bradley Joseph Jane Joseph Josquin des Prez Jovan Vladimir Joy Division Ernest Joyce James Joyce Master Juba Justus Ted Kaczynski Franz Kafka Paul Kagame Edgar Kain Dimple Kapadia Kareena Kapoor Abdul Karim (the Munshi) Robert Kaske Masako Katsura J. R. Kealoha Maynard James Keenan Fred Keenor George F. Kennan Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy Susi Kentikian Jomo Kenyatta Johannes Kepler Mark Kerry André Kertész Albert Ketèlbey Akhtar Hameed Khan Shah Rukh Khan Hasan al-Kharrat Nikita Khrushchev Bill Kibby Craig Kieswetter Harmon Killebrew Roy Kilner Bart King Elwyn Roy King Bruce Kingsbury Thomas C. Kinkaid The Kinks Johann von Klenau Nigel Kneale John Knox Kalki Koechlin Manuel I Komnenos Tadeusz Ko?ciuszko Sandy Koufax George Koval Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Walter Krueger Paul Kruger Nikolai Kulikovsky Nodar Kumaritashvili Cynna Kydd Leah LaBelle Lady Gaga Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette Ruby Laffoon Nestor Lakoba Mathew Charles Lamb Daniel Lambert Osbert Lancaster Kenesaw Mountain Landis Franklin Knight Lane Cosmo Gordon Lang George Lansbury LaRouche criminal trials Brie Larson Harold Larwood Lat (cartoonist) Laurence of Canterbury Jennifer Lawrence Ursula K. Le Guin John Le Mesurier Lê Quang Tung John Leak Raymond Leane Louis Leblanc Faith Leech Vivien Leigh Émile Lemoine Etta Lemon Suzanne Lenglen Vladimir Lenin John Lennon Dan Leno Helmut Lent John Lerew Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville David Lewis (Canadian politician) Maurice Leyland Lie Kim Hok Marcel Lihau Eli Lilly Ernst Lindemann Trevor Linden Lindow Man Ray Lindwall with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 El Lissitzky Little Tich Marie Lloyd Stefan Lochner Kellie Loder Carl Hans Lody Huey Long James B. Longacre William de Longchamp James Longstreet Joseph A. Lopez Lorde Prince Louis of Battenberg Courtney Love David Lovering Edward Low James Russell Lowell Sam Loxton Sam Loxton with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan Steve Lukather Glynn Lunney Luo Yixiu Roberto Luongo Witold Lutos?awski Marcus Ward Lyon Jr. Douglas MacArthur's escape from the Philippines Douglas MacArthur Charlie Macartney George Macaulay Angus Lewis Macdonald John A. Macdonald Gregor MacGregor Iven Mackay William Lyon Mackenzie Aeneas Mackintosh Archie MacLaren Bernard A. Maguire Gustav Mahler Miriam Makeba Malcolm X Garnet Malley Haane Manahi Manchester Mummy Nelson Mandela Bob Mann (American football) Olivia Manning Marcian Margaret (singer) Princess Maria Amélia of Brazil Clements Markham John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough Francis Marrash Jack Marsh Bob Marshall (wilderness activist) Thomas R. Marshall Billy Martin Marwan I Mary II of England Mary, Queen of Scots Mary of Teck Herbert Maryon Evelyn Mase George Mason Jules Massenet Frank Matcham Empress Matilda Lionel Matthews William Matthews (priest) Maximian Maximus the Confessor Murray Maxwell Jimmy McAleer Early life and military career of John McCain John McCain Bill McCann Paul McCartney John McCauley James Whiteside McCay Barbara McClintock James B. McCreary Lanny McDonald Frances Gertrude McGill John McGraw William McGregor (football) William McKinley Lesley J. McNair Frank McNamara (RAAF officer) H. C. McNeile Harry McNish William McSherry Ian Dougald McLachlan Alan McNicoll Ian Meckiff Ezra Meeker Jacobus Anthonie Meessen Megadeth B. Max Mehl Manon Melis Mellitus Danie Mellor Felix Mendelssohn Menkauhor Kaiu Mercury Seven Meshuggah André Messager Olivier Messiaen Metallica Bob Meusel August Meyszner Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident Khalid al-Mihdhar Military service of Ian Smith Harvey Milk Early life of Keith Miller Keith Miller in the 1946–47 Australian cricket season Keith Miller with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Kylie Minogue Sherman Minton Nancy Mitford Muhammad I of Granada Arthur Mold Emery Molyneux Marilyn Monroe Madeline Montalban Pierre Monteux Claudio Monteverdi George Moore (novelist) Henry Moore James Moore (Continental Army officer) Julianne Moore Fred Moosally Emanuel Moravec Howie Morenz Sandra Morgan Benjamin Morrell Arthur Morris Edwin P. Morrow Meinhard Michael Moser Benjamin Mountfort Mozart in Italy Al-Mu'tadid Al-Mu'tasim Muhammad II of Granada Muhammad III of Granada Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid Muhammad IV of Granada Rani Mukerji Samuel Mulledy Thomas F. Mulledy Baron Munchausen Douglas Albert Munro Madman Muntz Murasaki Shikibu Alister Murdoch Audie Murphy Cillian Murphy Harry Murray Margaret Murray Stan Musial R. A. B. Mynors Florence Nagle Fridtjof Nansen Daisy Jugadai Napaltjarri Wintjiya Napaltjarri Makinti Napanangka Ram Narayan Francis Nash Nasr of Granada John Neal (writer) Elizabeth Needham Neferefre Neferirkare Kakai James Nesbitt Hugh de Neville Ralph Neville James Newland Sydney Newman Bill Newton Ngô ?ình C?n Nguy?n Chánh Thi Carl Nielsen Nigel (bishop of Ely) Nine Inch Nails Nirvana (band) Pat Nixon Richard Nixon Emmy Noether John Mowbray, 3rd Duke of Norfolk Ruth Norman Roger Norreis Emperor Norton The Notorious B.I.G. Lisa Nowak Louie Nunn Nyuserre Ini Mary Margaret O'Reilly Barack Obama Ian O'Brien Odaenathus Óengus I Oerip Soemohardjo Offa of Mercia Kevin O'Halloran Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Olga Constantinovna of Russia Mark Oliphant Bronwyn Oliver Laurence Olivier Gerard K. O'Neill Opeth J. Robert Oppenheimer Sergo Ordzhonikidze Bill O'Reilly (cricketer) Leo Ornstein Johnny Owen Deepika Padukone Andreas Palaiologos Lionel Palairet Emmeline Pankhurst Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão, Marquis of Paraná José Paranhos, Viscount of Rio Branco Jack Parsons (rocket engineer) William Sterling Parsons Ben Paschal George S. Patton George S. Patton slapping incidents Paul E. Patton Ellis Paul Paulinus of York Death of Blair Peach Robert Peake the Elder Franklin Peale Pearl Jam Kosta Pe?anac Pedro I of Brazil Pedro II of Brazil Pedro Afonso, Prince Imperial of Brazil Bobby Peel Walter Peeler I. M. Pei Penda of Mercia Jerry Pentland Pepi I Meryre Thomas Percy (Gunpowder Plot) Pericles Katy Perry Henry Petre Milorad Petrovi? Ph?m Ng?c Th?o Phan ?ình Phùng Phan Xích Long Philip I Philadelphus Philitas of Cos Roy Phillipps Erin Phillips Tommy Phillips Artur Phleps Frank Pick Franklin Pierce Albert Pierrepoint Józef Pi?sudski Pink Floyd Harold Pinter Freida Pinto Benedetto Pistrucci Henry Ho?olulu Pitman Brad Pitt Pixies (band) John Plagis Jacques Plante Thomas Playford IV Gabriel Pleydell Edgar Allan Poe Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe Jean Baptiste Point du Sable James K. Polk Reg Pollard (general) Edwin Taylor Pollock Bill Ponsford Lazare Ponticelli Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre Francis Poulenc Ezra Pound Powderfinger Elizabeth Willing Powel Premiership of John Edward Brownlee Elvis Presley Joseph Priestley Adelaide Anne Procter Tom Pryce CM Punk Hilary Putnam Minnie Pwerle Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five Vidkun Quisling R.E.M. Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo Isidor Isaac Rabi Arthur W. Radford Radiohead Ion Heliade R?dulescu Elizabeth Raffald Rainilaiarivony Ramesses VI Alf Ramsey Norodom Ranariddh Kangana Ranaut Ranavalona I Ranavalona III Samuel J. Randall Milos Raonic Maurice Ravel Peter Raw Satyajit Ray William F. Raynolds Nancy Reagan Ronald Reagan Red Barn Murder Talbot Baines Reed Richard Gavin Reid Marian Rejewski Stamata Revithi L. D. Reynolds Wilfred Rhodes Richard II of England J. R. Richard Maurice Richard J. Havens Richards Ralph Richardson Louis Riel Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Jochen Rindt Mariano Rivera Hilda Rix Nicholas Robert of Jumièges Iwan Roberts Robert Roberts (author) George Robey Jackie Robinson Bobby Robson Roekiah Woodes Rogers Ambrose Rookwood Prince Romerson George W. Romney Mitt Romney William de Ros, 6th Baron Ros Juan Manuel de Rosas Hannah Primrose, Countess of Rosebery Elias Abraham Rosenberg Hrithik Roshan Art Ross Lawrence Sullivan Ross Gioachino Rossini James Rowland (RAAF officer) J. K. Rowling Jacob van Ruisdael Maria Rundell Martin Rundkvist Bill Russell Babe Ruth Alexander Cameron Rutherford Rex Ryan James A. Ryder John/Eleanor Rykener William S. Sadler Sahure Lady Saig? Camille Saint-Saëns Joe Sakic Salih ibn Mirdas Teresa Sampsonia Omayra Sánchez William Edward Sanders Joey Santiago Sasha (DJ) Mark Satin Death of Mark Saunders Reg Saunders Stanley Savige Henry W. Sawyer Antonin Scalia Frederick Scherger Sigi Schmid Charles Scott (governor) David Scott Robert Falcon Scott John Martin Scripps Uriel Sebree Laura Secord Daniel Sedin Henrik Sedin Seleucus VI Epiphanes Norman Selfe Peter Sellers Domenico Selvo Joel Selwood Jason Sendwe Sennacherib Waisale Serevi William H. Seward Sex Pistols Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz Ernest Shackleton Kenneth R. Shadrick Olivia Shakespear William Shakespeare Solomon P. Sharp Edmund Sharpe George Bernard Shaw Sebastian Shaw (actor) Joseph Francis Shea Wail al-Shehri Isaac Shelby Mary Shelley Shen Kuo Alan Shepard Elliott Fitch Shepard Jack Sheppard Kate Sheppard Shepseskare John Sherman William Tecumseh Sherman Grace Sherwood Mary Martha Sherwood Sheshi Dmitri Shostakovich Alfred Shout Shunzhi Emperor Sabrina Sidney Siegfried Lederer's escape from Auschwitz Arthur Sifton Silverchair Simeon I of Bulgaria Tom Simpson Wallis Simpson Siward, Earl of Northumbria Tyler Skaggs Red Skelton Slayer Andrew Sledd Louis Slotin The Smashing Pumpkins Bed?ich Smetana Faryl Smith Issy Smith Lee Smith (baseball) Ozzie Smith Samantha Smith Albertus Soegijapranata Georg Solti Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji Aaron Sorkin Albert Speer Lou Spence Edgar Speyer Adele Spitzeder Jo Stafford Myles Standish Charles Villiers Stanford Augustus Owsley Stanley Ringo Starr William T. Stearn Gwen Stefani Rod Steiger Ed Stelmach Casey Stengel Stephen I of Hungary Stephen, King of England Stereolab Thaddeus Stevens Clare Stevenson Melford Stevenson Charles Stewart (premier) Stigand Constance Stokes Emma Stone Charles H. Stonestreet Strapping Young Lad Eduard Streltsov Charlotte Stuart, Duchess of Albany Hod Stuart Ronald Stuart Vernon Sturdee Sudirman Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik Arthur Sullivan Arthur Sullivan (Australian soldier) Jethro Sumner The Supremes Jean-François-Marie de Surville Taylor Swift John Millington Synge William Howard Taft Paul Palaiologos Tagaris T?ru Takemitsu Don Tallon Bazy Tankersley Tarrare Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Tecumseh Edward Teller Terry-Thomas Theobald of Bec Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies John Thirtle Nguy?n Ng?c Th? Thomas of Bayeux Murder of Julia Martha Thomas Thomas the Slav William Beach Thomas Jim Thome James Thompson (surveyor) Tiny Thompson Tom Thomson Ian Thorpe Jeremy Thorpe Jim Thorpe Thurisind Paul Tibbets Tichborne case Benjamin Franklin Tilley Benjamin Tillman Michael Tippett Tiridates I of Armenia Joseph W. Tkach James Tod Mary Toft J. R. R. Tolkien Billy Joe Tolliver Death of Ian Tomlinson Tôn Th?t ?ính Mark Tonelli Tool (band) Ernie Toshack Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 Edgar Towner Meghan Trainor Bert Trautmann John Treloar (museum administrator) Marcus Trescothick Francis Tresham Stephen Trigg Sarah Trimmer Harry Trott Harry R. Truman Harry S. Truman Hugh Trumble Irakli Tsereteli Harriet Tubman George Tucker (politician) Thurman Tucker D. H. Turner Emma Louisa Turner Dick Turpin John Tyler John Tyndall (far-right activist) U2 Morihei Ueshiba Unas Uncle Tupelo Userkaf Fakih Usman Edvard August Vainio Mary van Kleeck Ralph Vaughan Williams Hedley Verity Peter Martyr Vermigli Georges Vézina Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine Queen Victoria Giovanni Villani George Vincent (painter) Barry Voight Kurt Vonnegut Jerry Voorhis Rudolf Vrba Vesna Vulovi? Ellis Wackett Abe Waddington John Lloyd Waddy Cosima Wagner Richard Wagner Princess Charlotte of Wales Kenneth Walker Alfred Russel Wallace Hector Waller Hugh Walpole Francis Walsingham Hubert Walter Allan Walters William Walton Joe Warbrick Fabian Ware William Warelwast Blair Wark John Wark Peter Warlock Jack L. Warner George Washington and slavery George Washington (inventor) Roger Waters Emma Watson Oswald Watt Evelyn Waugh Lawrence Weathers James B. Weaver Stanley Price Weir Henry Wells (general) Lawrence Wetherby Tyrone Wheatley Mortimer Wheeler Ryan White Thomas White (Australian politician) Gough Whitlam John Whittle The Wiggles Wiglaf of Mercia Wihtred of Kent William Wilberforce Wilco Maurice Wilder-Neligan Wilfrid Ellen Wilkinson William III of England William IV William of Wrotham William of Tyre William the Conqueror Bernard Williams Michelle Williams (actress) Nigel Williams (conservator) Richard Williams (RAAF officer) Nathaniel Parker Willis Wendell Willkie Francis Willughby John Wilton (general) Bob Windle Kate Winslet Reese Witherspoon W?adys?aw II Jagie??o P. G. Wodehouse Mary Wollstonecraft Rudolf Wolters Anna May Wong Henry Wood Samuel Merrill Woodbridge Michael Woodruff James Park Woods Alfred Worden Fanny Bullock Workman Edward Wright (mathematician) John Michael Wright Henry Wrigley Wulfhere of Mercia William Wurtenburg Yao Ming Robert Sterling Yard Yazid I Murder of Joanna Yeates W. B. Yeats John Young (astronaut) Yusuf I of Granada Frank Zappa Zenobia Catherine Zeta-Jones Zhang Heng Zhou Tong (archer) Preity Zinta Otto Julius Zobel Scott Zolak Nikita Zotov Huldrych Zwingli Peter van Geersdaele Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Biography Purge server cache Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Biography&oldid=1054781394" Categories: All portals Biography portal Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Portals with triaged subpages from June 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Wikipedia move-protected portals Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Languages ??????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano ?eština Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français ??????? ?????? Hrvatski ????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latviešu Lietuvi? ?????????? ?????? ???? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu ?????????? ??? ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? Polski Português Român? ??????? ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Suomi ???????/tatarça ????????? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Xitsonga Yorùbá ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 12 November 2021, at 02:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement