https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events Portal:Current events - Wikipedia Portal:Current events From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (October 2020) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events Edit instructions Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths Topics in the news SpaceX Crew-3 launch Kosmos 1408 is destroyed by a Russian anti-satellite weapon, producing space debris. We Continue the Change, led by Kiril Petkov and Asen Vasilev, wins the most seats in the Bulgarian general election. SpaceX's Crew-3 mission (launch pictured) takes four astronauts to the International Space Station. Former South African president F. W. de Klerk, who negotiated the end of apartheid with Nelson Mandela, dies at the age of 85. Ongoing: Belarus–European Union border crisis COVID-19 pandemic Recent deaths: Young Dolph Julio Lugo Ed Bullins Bertie Auld Seán FitzPatrick Art Stewart Nominate an article November 18, 2021 (2021-11-18) (Thursday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany COVID-19 vaccination in Germany The Standing Committee on Vaccination recommends a booster dose of the mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine should be given to all adults aged above 18 which administered six months after their second dose. (Deutsche Welle) Germany reports a record 65,371 new cases of COVID-19 for the second consecutive days. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 15,145 new COVID-19 cases in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,011,465. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis announces that beginning from November 22, unvaccinated people will be barred from entering all indoor venues which previously can present negative test results due to surge of the COVID-19 cases. He also announces that vaccine passport will expire seven months for people aged above 60 and urge them to receive booster dose. (Greek Reporter) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands The Netherlands reports a record 23,860 new cases of COVID-19 for the fourth consecutive days. (Dutch News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the second consecutive day of 1,251 deaths from COVID-19, bringing the nationwide death toll to 260,335. (The Moscow Times) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Laos Laos reports a record 1,041 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 58,798. (Vietnam Plus) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 3,292 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 406,605. (The Korea Herald) A lab in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States, is placed on temporary lockdown by the CDC after several vials containing the smallpox virus are discovered in a freezer. (CBS News) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Belarus suspends electricity supplies to Ukraine, in "accordance with the established procedure for interaction within the framework of contractual relations", according to the Belarusian Ministry of Energy. (Ukranews) Law and crime At Birmingham Crown Court in England, Zephaniah McLeod is sentenced to at least 21 years imprisonment for manslaughter and four counts of attempted murder after killing 1 and wounding 7 during a 90-minute stabbing spree in September 2020. (BBC News) Politics and elections 2021 Tongan general election Tongans go to the polls to elect their new government. About 60,000 people are registered to vote. (RNZ) November 17, 2021 (2021-11-17) (Wednesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks October 2021 Sudanese coup d'état Soldiers open fire on civilians in Khartoum, Sudan, protesting against last month's coup d'état, killing 14 people and injuring dozens more. This brings the total death toll of civilians killed during the protests to 38. (Al Jazeera) Insurgency in the Maghreb The death toll from the attack at a military post in Inata, Soum Province, Burkina Faso, three days ago, increases to 53, including 49 gendarmes and four civilians. (Al Jazeera) 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis; Estonia–Russia barrier Estonia summons 1,700 reservists for a snap drill, which will include installing a 40-kilometer-long razor wire barrier along the border with Russia as the migrant crisis with Belarus intensifies. (Reuters) Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The Canadian government sends the Air Force to the Pacific coast to assist with supplies after torrential rains affected regions of British Columbia near Vancouver, causing damage to highways. Minister of Emergency Preparedness Bill Blair says that landslides and floods have blocked the town of Agassiz and residents are now being assisted by the military. (Al Jazeera) A Royal Air Force F-35 Lightning II jet crashes into the Mediterranean Sea during a routine operation. The pilot successfully ejects from the aircraft and has been rescued. (The Guardian) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom COVID-19 pandemic in Northern Ireland The Northern Ireland Executive votes to introduce a COVID-19 vaccine passport beginning next month, which will contain a person's vaccination status or negative COVID-19 test result, and will be used to enter bars, restaurants and pubs. (BBC News) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 14,416 new COVID-19 cases in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 996,320. (ORF) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany Germany reports a record 52,826 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record 1,247 deaths from COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 259,084. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Spain, COVID-19 vaccination in Spain Spain’s panel of vaccine experts approves the extension of the COVID-19 vaccine booster dose to people between the ages of 60 and 69 and healthcare workers. (The Washington Post) COVID-19 pandemic in Argentina COVID-19 vaccination in Argentina Argentina receives a shipment of 800,000 doses of the Sinopharm COVID-19 vaccine. (Ámbito) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines The Food and Drug Administration of the Philippines authorises emergency use of the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine, which will be included in the national vaccination program. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States COVID-19 vaccination in the United States White House COVID-19 Response Coordinator Jeff Zients announces that 80% of people aged 12 and older have received their first doses of the COVID-19 vaccine. (USA Today) (WNCN) Politics and elections Former President of Georgia Mikheil Saakashvili, who has been on a hunger strike for 48 days, is in critical condition. Yesterday, Justice Minister Rati Bregadze denied Saakashvili transfer to a civilian clinic, from a prison hospital where he is being treated. (France 24) November 16, 2021 (2021-11-16) (Tuesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Insurgency in the Maghreb 2021 Niger attacks Gunmen raid the camp of self-defence militia in the village of Bakorat, Niger, killing 25 people. (Reuters) 2021 Uganda bombings Three suicide bombers blow themselves up near a police station and the entrance of the Parliament in Kampala, killing three people and injuring 33 others. The Islamic State claims responsibility for the attacks. (Reuters) 2021 Armenia–Azerbaijan border crisis Fifteen Armenian soldiers are killed and twelve more are captured by the Azerbaijani Armed Forces during border clashes, amid mutual recriminations before a Russian-brokered ceasefire is agreed at 19:00 local time. (JAMnews) Business and economy Gas prices for the United Kingdom and the European Union increase by 17% after the German energy regulator suspends the approval of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline from Russia to Germany. The regulator says that the pipeline needs to comply with German law before they can certify the €10 billion project. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte orders the lifting of the mandate to use face shields in areas under Alert 3 and lower levels, which includes the National Capital Region. However, face shields will continue to be used in areas under Alert level 5 and areas under granular lockdown. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a new single-day record of 495 critical cases of COVID-19. (Yonhap News Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Russia, COVID-19 drug development Russia authorizes Pfizer to conduct clinical trials for its experimental COVID-19 drug named Paxlovid, which will continue until March 2023. (The Hill) COVID-19 pandemic in Ukraine Ukraine reports a record 838 deaths from COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 77,895. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in New Zealand New Zealand reports a record 222 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (New Zealand Herald) Deployment of COVID-19 vaccines The number of Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine doses supplied worldwide surpasses two billion. (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 drug development Pfizer and the Medicines Patent Pool sign a global licensing agreement that will allow Pfizer's experimental COVID-19 oral drug Paxlovid to be manufactured under a royalty-free license in 95 low and middle-income countries. (The Wall Street Journal) 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak Japan reports an outbreak of the H5N8 bird flu strain at a farm with about 11,000 egg-laying chickens in Izumi, Kagoshima Prefecture. (Reuters) A peer-reviewed study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine announces that an Argentinian woman has allegedly been "functionally cured" of HIV by her own immune system. If confirmed, the woman would be only the second individual in history whose own immune system successfully destroyed the disease without any form of stem-cell transplantation. (USA Today) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Migrants at a temporarily closed checkpoint in Ku?nica, Poland, throw stones at Polish border guards, while attempting to destroy the border fence in order to break through the Belarus–Poland border. The guards respond with water cannons and tear gas in an attempt to disperse the mob. The Polish ministry accuses the Belarusian military of aiding the attacks along Poland's borders. (BBC) Russo-Ukrainian War British Prime Minister Boris Johnson states that the west will have to choose between reliance on Russian gas and supporting Ukraine amid reported buildups of the Russian military near the border with Ukraine. (The Guardian) Belarus–European Union relations Researchers at the American cybersecurity firm Mandiant report that the Belarusian government has ties to the hacker group Ghostwriter, which was accused of targeting various German politicians and ministries in September and has since been accused of launching misinformation campaigns against Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Ukraine. (RFE/RL) Law and crime The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) Politics and elections Politics of Monaco Princess Charlene of Monaco cancels all upcoming activities, including those of Monaco's national celebrations, due to ill health, according to a statement from the royal palace. The Princess is said to be suffering from "deep fatigue". (Reuters) Pandora Papers The impeachment against Chilean President Sebastián Piñera is defeated in the Senate, after the motion fails to meet the minimum two-thirds threshold in a vote. (Bloomberg) Science and technology Moons of Saturn A new moon of Saturn, S/2019 S 1, is announced, bringing the total number of known moons to 83. (Minor Planet Center) November 15, 2021 (2021-11-15) (Monday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Insurgency in the Maghreb The death toll from yesterday's mass shooting at a military post near a gold mine in Inata, Soum Province, Burkina Faso, increases to 32, including 28 gendarmes and four civilians, making the attack the deadliest against security forces in the country. (Reuters) Liverpool Women's Hospital bombing Yesterday's taxi explosion in Liverpool, England, that killed the bomber and injured the driver outside the Liverpool Women's Hospital, is declared a terrorist incident by police. Mayor Joanne Anderson says that the driver locked the bomber inside the vehicle after noticing that the bomber was wearing an explosive device. (BBC News) (WalesOnline) Three al-Shabaab members escape from a maximum security prison in Kenya, including one of the perpetrators of the 2015 Garissa attack, in which 148 people were killed. (Reuters) Business and economy Infrastructure policy of the Joe Biden administration U.S. President Joe Biden signs the $1.2 trillion Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act into law. (The Washington Post) Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods Merritt, British Columbia, Canada is evacuated after severe flooding inundated the city of about 7,000. Several highways throughout southern British Columbia were also washed out by heavy rain, leaving at least 10 people stranded. (CBC) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Cambodia, Travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic Cambodia begins to allow fully vaccinated foreign travellers to visit the country without a quarantine if they show a negative test result from the previous 72 hours and test negative again upon arrival, as the country currently has the one of world's highest COVID-19 vaccination rates. (AFP via Barron's) COVID-19 pandemic in India, Travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic India reopens its border to fully vaccinated foreign travellers on regular commercial flights after being closed for 18 months since March 2020 due to a decrease in the number of new COVID-19 cases. All travellers must follow COVID-19 protocols and show a negative test result from the previous 72 hours, except those from countries with mutual vaccine recognition. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in Sri Lanka, COVID-19 drug development Sri Lanka approves the use of the COVID-19 oral drug molnupiravir in the country. (Adaderana) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany Berlin begins to implement "2G" rule that limiting access to restaurants, cinemas, bars, and cultural and entertainment venues to those who are vaccinated or have recovered from COVID-19 amid a rising number of COVID-19 cases across Germany. (VOA) COVID-19 pandemic in Latvia Latvia ends its 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. curfew and allows companies to fire employees who are unvaccinated against COVID-19. Unvaccinated people are also banned from taking their duties for parliament and entering shopping malls with a size greater than 1,500 square metres (16,000 sq ft). (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom, COVID-19 vaccination in the United Kingdom The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation approves the extension of age eligibility of COVID-19 vaccine booster doses in the United Kingdom to people between 40 and 49 years old and the second dose for teenagers between the ages of 16 and 17 years. (The Guardian) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Queensland Queensland reopens its state border to fully vaccinated Australians travelling by plane, as 70% of the state's adult population are now fully vaccinated. (ABC News Australia) COVID-19 pandemic in Egypt Egypt begins to ban unvaccinated public sector employees and university students from entering workplaces and universities unless they show a negative PCR test from the previous 72 hours. (Arab News) International relations China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) Foreign relations of Kiribati The government of New Zealand vows to help islanders in Banaba, Kiribati, to access fresh water, as the island suffers from frequent droughts and is dependent on rainfall. (RNZ) 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis The European Union says it will impose new sanctions on Belarus in response to the migrant crisis on the Belarus–Poland border. (CNN) Politics and elections 2021 Argentine legislative election With nearly all votes counted, the ruling Peronist government loses control of both the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. This is the first time since the return to democracy in 1983 that Peronists do not have a majority in either house. (El Mostrador Chile) Science and technology Russia carries out a direct-ascent anti-satellite weapon test on the defunct Soviet spacecraft Kosmos 1408, creating a cloud of debris that threatens the International Space Station. (SpaceNews) November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) (Sunday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Insurgency in the Maghreb Gunmen open fire at a military post near a gold mine in Inata, Soum Province, Burkina Faso, killing 19 gendarmes and a civilian. (Al Jazeera) Liverpool Women's Hospital bombing A passenger is killed and his driver injured when a taxi explodes in front of the Liverpool Women's Hospital in Liverpool, England. Three men are subsequently arrested under the Terrorism Act. (BBC News) Syrian civil war A bomb explodes near a vehicle carrying troops in Deir ez-Zor, Syria, killing four soldiers and a general. (The New Arab) Somali Civil War; Capital punishment in Somalia Two Ugandan soldiers are sentenced to death and three more receive 39-year prison sentences in Somalia for killing seven civilians during a gun battle in Golweyn, Lower Shabelle, three months ago. (BBC News) Disasters and accidents Astroworld Festival crowd crush A 9-year-old boy, injured during a crowd crush at the Astroworld Music Festival, who had been in a medically-induced coma, dies, bringing the death toll to 10. (CNN) European migrant crisis Eight sub-Saharan African migrants are found dead on a boat adrift off the southern coast of the Canary Islands, with 54 other men being rescued from the boat. (El País) A fire at a COVID-19 ward in Sliven, Bulgaria, kills three patients. (ABC News) A magnitude 6.5 earthquake strikes Hormozgan Province, Iran, at a depth of 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) and is felt in many southern Iranian cities. A man killed by a falling pole is the sole death reported. (Reuters) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg announces a nationwide lockdown for those over the age of 12 years who are unvaccinated against COVID-19, which prohibits them from leaving their homes except for essential reasons beginning at midnight, amid a record increase in new COVID-19 cases. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in Egypt, COVID-19 vaccination in Egypt The Egyptian government announces the start of clinical trials for COVI-VAX, which is the country’s first domestically-made COVID-19 vaccine. (Ahram Online) COVID-19 pandemic in Israel, COVID-19 vaccination in Israel The Israeli Health ministry approves the usage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children aged 5 to 11, two weeks after the U.S. FDA grants its own approval, with vaccination expected to begin next week. (Haaretz) COVID-19 pandemic in Peru Peru announces that people over the age of 18 years who want to enter indoor spaces must show a proof of full vaccination against COVID-19 beginning in December, either physical or virtual vaccination cards. (AFP via Barron's) Politics and elections 2021 Bulgarian general election Bulgarians go to the polls to elect the President and the National Assembly. (MSN) 2021 Argentine legislative election Argentines go to the polls to elect members of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. (24/7 News Agency) November 13, 2021 (2021-11-13) (Saturday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Afghanistan conflict A magnetic bomb attached to a minivan explodes in Dasht-e-Barachi, a predominantly Hazara district of Kabul, killing six people and injuring seven others. (Reuters) Syrian civil war Islamic State gunmen ambush a group of soldiers in Masrib, Deir ez-Zor, Syria, killing 13 of them and wounding others. (The New Arab) Tigray War The Ethiopian Human Rights Commission publishes a report accusing the Tigray People's Liberation Front of killing more than 150 civilians in the Amhara Region between July and August. The report states that they were killed for either supporting the federal government or sheltering soldiers. (Al Jazeera) Gunmen ambush a convoy of paramilitary soldiers in Churachandpur, Manipur, India, killing five soldiers and two civilians. (Al Jazeera) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 13,152 new COVID-19 cases in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 948,100. (Kurier) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany Germany reintroduces free COVID-19 testing for all adults amid a record number of new cases. (The New York Times) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greece tightens its guidelines by requiring that no more than one person per nine square meters of floor space be allowed to enter into supermarkets. This new policy was implemented after a proposed policy that would require unvaccinated people to provide a mandatory rapid COVID-19 test in order to enter supermarkets was deemed too difficult to implement. (Ekathimerini) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record 1,241 deaths from COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide death toll to 254,167. The country also surpasses nine million cases of COVID-19. (Azeri Press Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Papua New Guinea New Zealand sends doctors to Papua New Guinea, after Papua New Guinea formally requested international help to combat the worsening COVID-19 situation in the country. (RNZ) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States The U.S. surpasses 47 million cases of COVID-19. (WFTV) 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference At COP26, diplomats from countries around the world reach a major agreement aimed at intensifying global efforts to fight climate change by calling on governments to return next year with stronger plans to curb planet-warming emissions and urging wealthy nations to "at least double" their funding in order to protect poorer nations from the hazards of a warming planet. Some activists are critical of the agreement, as it leaves unresolved the question of how much and how quickly each nation should cut its carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions over the next decade, and it still leaves many developing countries short of the funds that they would need in order to cope with increasing weather disasters. However, the agreement makes reference to fossil fuels and their role in the climate crisis for the first time in the conference's history. (CNN) (The New York Times) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Russian President Vladimir Putin says that the threat made by Belarus to cut their gas supply to Europe would be a breach of the contract with Russia and that such a threat may have been made in a fit of temper by Belarus's president Alexander Lukashenko. (BBC News) Law and crime November 2021 Guayaquil prison riot Sixty-eight inmates are killed and 25 others injured in a prison riot in Guayaquil, Ecuador. (BBC News) Politics and elections Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 protests in Australia Thousands of protesters associated with the right-wing United Australia Party march in Melbourne in opposition to vaccine mandates and newly introduced laws in the Victoria State Government which would transfer many pandemic-specific powers from the Chief Health Officer to the Premier and Health Minister. (The Guardian) November 12, 2021 (2021-11-12) (Friday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Afghanistan conflict Three people are killed and 15 others injured by a bombing during prayers at a mosque in Spin Ghar, Nangarhar Province. (Al Jazeera) Disasters and accidents A Cessna 172 crashes in Hampton Township, New Jersey, United States, killing two people, including businessman and space tourist Glen de Vries. (USA Today) Two Russian paratroopers are killed during military drills near the Polish border in western Belarus. The Ministry of Defence says their parachutes failed to deploy properly "due to a sudden strong gust of wind" during their jumps. (Euronews) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Thailand Thailand delays the reopening of nightlife entertainment venues to January 15 due to concerns about ventilation and inefficient prevention measures in pubs, bars and karaoke venues. (The Independent) Thailand surpasses two million cases of COVID-19. (Asian News International) COVID-19 pandemic in Japan The government announces that they will obtain 1.6 million doses of Merck & Co.'s molnupiravir and have also increased hospital capacities for COVID-19 patients to 30% in order to prepare for a sixth wave of the pandemic. (Kyodo News) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Denmark Denmark reintroduces its digital pass that must be used in nightclubs, cafés, indoor seating at restaurants, and at outdoor events with more than 2,000 people as it reclassifies COVID-19 as "a socially critical disease" amid an increase in new cases. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Dutch caretaker prime minister Mark Rutte announces a three-week partial lockdown that requires bars, restaurants, and shops to close at certain times and reintroduces 1.5 m (4 ft 11 in) social distancing measures beginning tomorrow. The Netherlands is the first country in Western Europe to impose a lockdown since the summer. (The Guardian) COVID-19 pandemic in Mauritius Mauritius imposes new restrictions that limit the number of people in large gatherings such as funerals, weddings, and rallies amid an increase in the number of COVID-19 cases despite high vaccination rates. (AFP via France 24) International relations Eritrea–United States relations The U.S. Treasury Department imposes sanctions on the Eritrean Military and other Eritrea-based entities and individuals in an attempt to bring an end to the Tigray War. The sanctions also blacklist the Eritrean ruling party People's Front for Democracy and Justice. (Reuters) 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis, Belarus–Iraq relations Iraq restricts direct flights to Belarus amid the migrant crisis in at the Belarus–Poland border. (Kurdistan 24) Law and crime Aftermath of the 2021 United States Capitol attack U.S. Attorney General Merrick Garland announces that former White House Chief Strategist Steve Bannon has been charged by the U.S. Department of Justice for refusing to testify before the January 6 select committee investigating the Capitol riot and also refusing to provide documents requested by the committee. (NBC News) Britney Spears conservatorship dispute American singer Britney Spears is released from her 13-year conservatorship in accordance with a ruling by judge Brenda J. Penny of the Los Angeles County Superior Court, following allegations of abuse originating from fan speculation, media investigation, and public testimony. (AFP via Manila Bulletin) American journalist Danny Fenster is sentenced by a Myanmar military court to 11 years in prison, after being found guilty of three charges brought against him. (CNN) The European Commission announces its intention to bring the government of Portugal to the European Court of Justice over persistent violations of Directive 2008/50/EC, which limits the amount of certain emissions a country can produce in order to regulate air pollution. (Reuters) Politics and elections COVID-19 pandemic in Latvia, Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on politics The Saeima votes 62–7 with two abstentions and 29 absent lawmakers to ban MPs who refuse to be vaccinated against COVID-19 from voting and participating in the parliament, both for in-person and remote meetings. The restrictions will be in effect from November 15 until July 1. (ABC News) (Reuters) Politics of El Salvador The Legislative Assembly begins to discuss president Nayib Bukele's proposal to regulate criticism of the government by civil organizations and media critics of the government. (El País) Sports 2022 Winter Olympics, Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on sports China reports the first cases of COVID-19 among foreign athletes who will participate in the Winter Olympics, with two lugers from an unidentified nation testing positive. (Reuters) More November 2021 events... Time: 21:03 UTC|Day: 18 November ?November 2021? S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 More November 2021 events...    About this page Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia Ongoing events Disasters Climate crisis COVID-19 pandemic 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak 2021 Atlantic hurricane season 2021 Pacific typhoon season Madagascar food crisis Water crisis in Iran Yemeni famine 2021 La Palma eruption Economic 2020–2021 global chip shortage 2021 global supply chain crisis COVID-19 recession Lebanese liquidity crisis Pandora Papers leak Turkish currency and debt crisis United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Politics Belarus?European Union border crisis Brazilian protests Colombian tax reform protests Eswatini protests Haitian protests Indian farmers' protests Insulate Britain protests Jersey dispute Libyan peace process Malaysian political crisis Myanmar protests Nicaraguan protests Nigerian protests Persian Gulf crisis Peruvian crisis Romanian political crisis Russian election protests Tigrayan peace process Thai protests Tunisian political crisis United States racial unrest Venezuelan presidential crisis edit section Elections and referendums Recent November 4: Falkland Islands, Legislative Assembly 7: Nicaragua, President, National Assembly 14: Bulgaria, President (1st), National Assembly 14: Argentina, Chamber of Deputies, Senate 18: Tonga, Legislative Assembly Upcoming November 21: Bulgaria, President (2nd) 21: Chile, President, Senate, Chamber of Deputies 28: Honduras, President, National Congress 28: Kyrgyzstan, Supreme Council edit section Trials Recently concluded Belarus: Maria Kalesnikava France: Nicolas Sarkozy Myanmar: Danny Fenster Rwanda: Paul Rusesabagina United States: Yanjun Xu, Lev Parnas, R. Kelly, Robert Durst Ongoing Armenia: Serzh Sargsyan Belarus: Sergei Tikhanovsky Canada: Raj Grewal France: Brussels ISIL Indonesia: Nurdin Abdullah Israel: Benjamin Netanyahu Italy: Matteo Salvini Kyrgyzstan: Almazbek Atambayev Malta: Yorgen Fenech Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi Philippines: Leila de Lima Sudan: Omar al-Bashir United States: Elizabeth Holmes, Kyle Rittenhouse, Death of Ahmaud Arbery Upcoming Indonesia: Azis Syamsuddin, Alex Noerdin Kosovo: Hashim Thaçi, Kadri Veseli Lesotho: Maesiah Thabane United States: Allen Weisselberg, Ghislaine Maxwell, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Jussie Smollett Vatican City: Giovanni Angelo Becciu ICC: Ali Kushayb edit section Sport Association football 2021–22 UEFA Europa League 2021–22 UEFA Champions league 2021–22 Premier League 2021–22 Bundesliga 2021–22 Serie A 2021–22 La Liga 2021 Copa Libertadores final stages 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification 2020–21 UEFA Nations League 2021 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A 2021 MLS Cup Playoffs Women's association football 2021 NWSL season American football 2021 NCAA Division I FBS football season 2021 NCAA Division I FCS football season 2021 NFL season Baseball 2021 NPB season Basketball 2021–22 NBA season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Women's Basketball Season Cricket 2021–23 ICC World Test Championship 2020–23 ICC Cricket World Cup Super League 2019–23 ICC Cricket World Cup League 2 2019–22 ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League  Canadian football 2021 CFL season Golf 2021 European Tour 2021 LPGA Tour 2020 PGA Tour Champions 2021 Ladies European Tour 2021–22 PGA Tour Ice hockey 2021–22 NHL season 2021–22 IIHF Continental Cup Motorsport 2021 Formula One Championship 2021 Rally Championship 2021 MotoGP 2021 Supercars Championship Rugby union 2021–22 Premiership Rugby 2021–22 United Rugby Championship 2021–22 Top 14 2021 Bunnings NPC 2021 Super Rugby season Tennis 2021 ATP Tour 2021 WTA Tour 2020–21 Davis Cup (Finals) Other sports seasons 2021–22 International cricket season 2021–22 snooker season 2021–22 curling season More details – current sports events edit section Recent deaths November 18: Ardeshir Zahedi 17: Young Dolph 15: Clarissa Eden 15: Daulet Sembaev 14: Etel Adnan 13: Sam Huff 13: Wilbur Smith 12: Matthew Festing 11: F. W. de Klerk 11: Glen de Vries 11: Graeme Edge 11: Winter 10: Jun Hong Lu 9: Max Cleland 9: Austin Currie 8: Pedro Feliciano 8: Seán FitzPatrick 8: Mahlagha Mallah 8: Abdul Wahab Dalimunthe 7: Dean Stockwell 6: Angelo Mosca 6: Shawn Rhoden 6: Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé 6: Muamer Zukorli? 6: Yukhym Zvyahilsky 5: Marília Mendonça 4: Ruth Ann Minner 4: Lionel Blair 3: Georgie Dann 2: Sabah Fakhri 1: Aaron Beck October 31: Catherine Tizard 30: Jerry Remy 30: Alan Davidson 30: Bert Newton 29: Clément Mouamba 29: Iran Darroudi 29: Ashley Mallett 29: José Antonio González 27: Michael Laughlin 26: Mort Sahl 26: Walter Smith 26: Roh Tae-woo 25: Alfredo Diez Nieto 25: Fofi Gennimata 24: Arnold Hano 24: James Michael Tyler 24: John Traynor 24: Erna de Vries 22: Jay Black 22: Peter Scolari 22: George Butler 22: Udo Zimmermann 21: Yasin Abu Bakr 21: Martha Henry 21: Bernard Haitink 21: Halyna Hutchins 20: Jerry Pinkney edit section Ongoing conflicts Africa Angola Cabinda War Cameroon Anglophone Crisis Central African Republic Civil War Chad Insurgency in Northern Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Kivu conflict Allied Democratic Forces insurgency Ituri conflict Lord's Resistance Army insurgency Kamwina Nsapu rebellion Ethiopia Tigray War (spillover) Oromo conflict Ethiopia and Sudan Sudanese–Ethiopian clashes Ghana Western Togoland Rebellion Maghreb and Sahel regions Maghreb insurgency Mali Mali War Mozambique Insurgency in Cabo Delgado Nigeria Boko Haram insurgency (incl. Lake Chad region) Communal conflicts in Nigeria Senegal Casamance conflict Somalia Civil war South Sudan Ethnic violence in South Sudan Sudan War in Darfur South Kordofan conflict Sudanese nomadic conflicts (incl. South Sudan) Tunisia ISIL insurgency in Tunisia Western Sahara Western Sahara conflict 2020–2021 Western Saharan clashes Americas Colombia Colombian conflict Mexico Mexican drug war Peru Internal conflict in Peru Paraguay Insurgency in Paraguay Asia-Pacific Afghanistan Panjshir conflict Islamic State–Taliban conflict India Insurgency in Northeast India Assam separatist movements Insurgency in Manipur Ethnic conflict in Nagaland Khalistan movement Naxalite–Maoist insurgency India and Pakistan Kashmir conflict Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines Moro conflict Cross border attacks in Sabah Indonesia Papua conflict Myanmar Internal conflict in Myanmar Kachin conflict Karen conflict Rohingya conflict Pakistan Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Insurgency in Balochistan Philippines Communist rebellion Philippine drug war Thailand South Thailand insurgency Europe Armenia and Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Ukraine War in Donbas Russo-Ukrainian War Ireland and the UK Dissident Irish republican campaign Turkey Kurdish–Turkish conflict Global War on terror Middle East Egypt Sinai insurgency Iran and the Persian Gulf Iran–Israel proxy conflict Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict Sistan and Baluchestan insurgency Arab separatism in Khuzestan Kurdish separatism in Iran Iraq Iraqi conflict American-led intervention in Iraq Iranian intervention in Iraq Iraq and Syria (map) International military intervention against ISIL Israel and Gaza Israel and Syria Israeli-Syrian border conflict Israeli-Syrian ceasefire line incidents Syria American-led intervention in Syria Russian military intervention in the Syrian civil war Turkish occupation of northern Syria Yemen and Saudi Arabia Yemeni Civil War Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen Houthi–Saudi Arabian conflict Further information: List of ongoing armed conflicts edit section 2021 events and developments by topic Arts Architecture – Animation – Anime – Comics – Film (Horror, Science fiction) – Home video – Literature – Music (Classical, Country, Hip hop, Latin, Metal, Rock, UK, US) – Radio – Television (UK, US, Italy, Scotland) – Video games Politics and government Elections – International leaders – Sovereign states – Sovereign state leaders – Territorial governors Science and technology Archaeology – Biotechnology – Computing – Palaeontology – Quantum computing and communication – Senescence research – Sustainable energy research – Space/Astronomy – Spaceflight Environment and environmental sciences Birding/Ornithology – Climate change Transportation Aviation – Rail transport By place Afghanistan – Albania – Algeria – Andorra – Angola – Antarctica – Argentina – Armenia – Australia – Austria – Azerbaijan – Bangladesh – The Bahamas – Bahrain – Barbados – Belarus – Belgium – Benin – Bhutan – Bolivia – Bosnia and Herzegovina – Botswana – Brazil – Bulgaria – Burkina Faso – Burundi – Cambodia – Cameroon – Canada – Cape Verde – Central African Republic – Chad – Chile – China – Colombia – Costa Rica – Comoros – Croatia – Cuba – Cyprus – Czech Republic – Denmark – Ecuador – Egypt – El Salvador – Eritrea – Estonia – Ethiopia – European Union – Eswatini – Fiji – Finland – France – Gabon – Georgia – Germany – Ghana – Greece – Guatemala – Guinea – Guinea-Bissau – Guyana – Haiti – Honduras – Hong Kong – Hungary – Iceland – India – Indonesia – Iran – Iraq – Ireland – Israel – Italy – Ivory Coast – Japan – Jordan – Kazakhstan – Kenya – Kiribati – Kosovo – Kuwait – Kyrgyzstan – Laos – Latvia – Lebanon – Lesotho – Liberia – Libya – Lithuania – Luxembourg – Macau – Madagascar – Marshall Islands – Malawi – Malaysia – Mali – Malta – Mauritania – Mexico – Micronesia – Moldova – Mongolia – Montenegro – Morocco – Mozambique – Myanmar – Nauru – Namibia – Nepal – Netherlands – New Zealand – Nicaragua – Niger – Nigeria – North Korea – North Macedonia – Norway – Oman – Pakistan – Palau – Palestine – Panama – Papua New Guinea – Paraguay – Peru – Philippines – Poland – Portugal – Qatar – Romania – Russia – Rwanda – Samoa – Saudi Arabia – Senegal – Serbia – Seychelles – Singapore – Slovakia – Slovenia – Somalia – South Africa – Solomon Islands – South Korea – South Sudan – Spain – Sri Lanka – Sudan – Sweden – Switzerland – Syria – Taiwan – Tajikistan – Tanzania – Thailand – Togo – Tonga – Tunisia – Turkey – Turkmenistan – Tuvalu – Uganda – Ukraine – United Arab Emirates – United Kingdom – United States – Uruguay – Uzbekistan – Vanuatu – Venezuela – Vietnam – Yemen – Zambia – Zimbabwe Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments – Disestablishments Works and introductions categories Works – Introductions – Works entering the public domain Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2021. ...more edit section v t e Events by month 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2001 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2000 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1999 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1998 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1997 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1996 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1995 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1994 January February March April May June July August September October November December Portal:Current events Calendars Content listings Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured content Good articles Spoken articles Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Current_events&oldid=1054047874" Categories: All portals 2021 by day Current events portal 2021 Current events History portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages protected against vandalism Portals with triaged subpages from October 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Ænglisc ??????? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????? Banjar Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ??????? Bikol Central Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Dansk ?????? ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? IsiZulu Íslenska Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Li Niha Limburgs Magyar ?????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau ?????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Nederlands ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ????????? Piemontèis Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? ??? ?????????? ???? Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zeêuws ?? Dagbanli Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 19:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events Portal:Current events - Wikipedia Portal:Current events From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (October 2020) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events Edit instructions Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths Topics in the news SpaceX Crew-3 launch Kosmos 1408 is destroyed by a Russian anti-satellite weapon and becomes a cloud of space debris. We Continue the Change, led by Kiril Petkov and Asen Vasilev, wins the most seats in the Bulgarian general election. SpaceX's Crew-3 mission (launch pictured) takes four astronauts to the International Space Station. Former South African president F. W. de Klerk, who negotiated the end of apartheid with Nelson Mandela, dies at the age of 85. Ongoing: Belarus–European Union border crisis COVID-19 pandemic Recent deaths: Dzifa Attivor Young Dolph Julio Lugo Ed Bullins Bertie Auld Seán FitzPatrick Nominate an article November 20, 2021 (2021-11-20) (Saturday) edit history watch Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 22,936 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) COVID-19 pandemic in Hong Kong, COVID-19 vaccination in Hong Kong Hong Kong authorises the usage of the Sinovac CoronaVac vaccine for children aged 3 to 17 years old. (The Guardian) Water crisis in Iran, 2016–2021 Iranian protests Thousands of people gather at Isfahan's Khaju Bridge to protest the government's water and energy politics. (Al Jazeera) Law and crime Two people are shot and seriously wounded by police during protests against COVID-19 measures in Rotterdam, Netherlands. Fifty-one more are arrested, half of whom are aged under 18. (Reuters) November 19, 2021 (2021-11-19) (Friday) edit history watch Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The provincial government of British Columbia, Canada, declares a state of emergency in response to ongoing risks from floods and mudslides. Effective immediately until December 1, citizens in affected regions, including the Lower Mainland and Vancouver Island, are limited to 30 litres of diesel and gasoline purchased at fuel stations. Vehicles used for essential services, such as emergency response, commercial transport, and public transit, are exempt from this order and granted unlimited access to cardlock gas stations ordinarily used by the commercial trucking industry. Price gouging at retail gas stations and the resale of fuel is prohibited. Restrictions on non-essential travel along damaged highways are also set in place. (Global News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austrian chancellor Alexander Schallenberg announces a full nationwide lockdown for the entire population starting on 22 November, amid a surge in new COVID-19 cases that has overwhelmed hospitals. Schallenberg also announces that COVID-19 vaccinations will become mandatory as of 1 February 2022. (The Independent) Austria reports a record for the second consecutive day of 15,809 new cases of COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,027,274. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany The southern German state of Bavaria cancels all Christmas markets and imposes a lockdown in all districts that have a seven-day incidence rate of over 1,000 per 100,000 people amid a substantial increase in the number of new COVID-19 cases. However, schools and kindergartens will continue to remain open. (Deutsche Welle) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 11,289 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 998,488. (Budapest Business Journal) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the third consecutive day of 1,254 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 261,589. (Interfax) COVID-19 pandemic in North America COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada approves the usage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (Global News) COVID-19 pandemic in Grenada Argentina officially announces that it will donate 11,000 doses of the Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine to Grenada. (Memo) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Victoria Restrictions are further eased for fully vaccinated Victorians as 90% of adults are now fully vaccinated. Mask wearing is still required in some indoor spaces and limits remain on daily visitor numbers to care facilities. Additionally, unvaccinated people continue to be banned from entering all non-essential businesses and also from employment in many industries. (The Guardian) International relations Palestine–United Kingdom relations The United Kingdom outlaws Hamas, the Palestinian militant group which serves as the ruling party of the Gaza Strip, and declares the party as a terrorist group. Previously, only the party's armed wing was outlawed. (Reuters) Law and crime Kenosha unrest shooting Kyle Rittenhouse, an 18-year-old who shot three people during the Kenosha unrest in Wisconsin, United States, in August 2020, is found not guilty on all counts. (NPR) Hundreds of people marched in Chicago, New York City and Portland to protest the verdict of the trial. (CBS) (CBS), (ABC) Politics and elections Iraqi Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr announces that he is dissolving the Promised Day Brigade, the armed faction loyal to him. Yesterday, al-Sadr said that non-governmental armed militias should hand in their weapons. (Reuters) Vice Presidency of Kamala Harris While Joe Biden undergoes medical treatment, Kamala Harris gains presidential power for a short period of time, making her the first female acting president in the United States. (Forbes) November 18, 2021 (2021-11-18) (Thursday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) Arts and culture 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany COVID-19 vaccination in Germany The Standing Committee on Vaccination recommends that a booster dose of an mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine should be given to all adults over the age of 18 years. (Deutsche Welle) Germany reports a record for the second consecutive day of 65,371 new cases of COVID-19. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 15,145 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,011,465. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis announces that beginning on November 22, unvaccinated people will be banned from entering all indoor venues for which they could previously present a negative test result, due to an increase in new COVID-19 cases. Mitsotakis also announces that vaccine passports will expire after seven months for people over the age of 60 years and urges people in this age group to receive a booster dose. (Greek Reporter) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands The Netherlands reports a record for the fourth consecutive day of 23,860 new cases of COVID-19. (Dutch News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the second consecutive day of 1,251 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 260,335. (The Moscow Times) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Laos Laos reports a record 1,041 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 58,798. (Vietnam Plus) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 3,292 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 406,605. (The Korea Herald) A lab in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States, is placed on temporary lockdown by the CDC after several vials labeled "smallpox" are discovered in a freezer. (CBS News) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Belarus suspends electricity supplies to Ukraine, in "accordance with the established procedure for interaction within the framework of contractual relations", according to a statement from the Belarusian Ministry of Energy. (Ukranews) Law and crime At the Birmingham Crown Court in England, Zephaniah McLeod is sentenced to at least 21 years imprisonment for manslaughter and four counts of attempted murder after killing one person and wounding seven others during a 90-minute stabbing spree in September 2020. (BBC News) The New York Supreme Court vacates the convictions of Muhammad Abdul Aziz (formerly Norman 3X Butler) and the late Khalil Islam (formerly Thomas 15X Johnson) for the 1965 assassination of Malcolm X. The two men were convicted alongside Thomas Hagan (formerly Talmadge Hayer) in 1966. An investigation led by Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr. discovered that the FBI and the NYPD had withheld evidence that would have acquitted Aziz and Islam. (The New York Times) Politics and elections 2021 Tongan general election Tongans go to the polls to elect their new government. (RNZ) November 17, 2021 (2021-11-17) (Wednesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Sudanese coup d'état Soldiers open fire on civilians in Khartoum, Sudan, protesting against last month's coup d'état, killing 14 people and injuring dozens more. This brings the total death toll of civilians killed during the protests to 38. (Al Jazeera) Insurgency in the Maghreb The death toll from the attack at a military post in Inata, Soum Province, Burkina Faso, three days ago, increases to 53, including 49 gendarmes and four civilians. (Al Jazeera) 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis; Estonia–Russia barrier Estonia summons 1,700 reservists for a snap drill, which will include installing a 40-kilometer-long razor wire barrier along the border with Russia as the migrant crisis with Belarus intensifies. (Reuters) Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The Canadian government sends the Air Force to the Pacific coast to assist with supplies after torrential rains affected regions of British Columbia near Vancouver, causing damage to highways. Minister of Emergency Preparedness Bill Blair says that landslides and floods have blocked the town of Agassiz and residents are now being assisted by the military. (Al Jazeera) A Royal Air Force F-35 Lightning II jet crashes into the Mediterranean Sea during a routine operation. The pilot successfully ejects from the aircraft and has been rescued. (The Guardian) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom COVID-19 pandemic in Northern Ireland The Northern Ireland Executive votes to introduce a COVID-19 vaccine passport beginning next month, which will contain a person's vaccination status or negative COVID-19 test result, and will be used to enter bars, restaurants and pubs. (BBC News) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 14,416 new COVID-19 cases in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 996,320. (ORF) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany Germany reports a record 52,826 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record 1,247 deaths from COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 259,084. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Spain, COVID-19 vaccination in Spain Spain’s panel of vaccine experts approves the extension of the COVID-19 vaccine booster dose to people between the ages of 60 and 69 and healthcare workers. (The Washington Post) COVID-19 pandemic in Argentina COVID-19 vaccination in Argentina Argentina receives a shipment of 800,000 doses of the Sinopharm COVID-19 vaccine. (Ámbito) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines The Food and Drug Administration of the Philippines authorises emergency use of the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine, which will be included in the national vaccination program. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States COVID-19 vaccination in the United States White House COVID-19 Response Coordinator Jeff Zients announces that 80% of people aged 12 and older have received their first doses of the COVID-19 vaccine. (USA Today) (WNCN) Politics and elections Former President of Georgia Mikheil Saakashvili, who has been on a hunger strike for 48 days, is in critical condition. Yesterday, Justice Minister Rati Bregadze denied Saakashvili transfer to a civilian clinic, from a prison hospital where he is being treated. (France 24) November 16, 2021 (2021-11-16) (Tuesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Insurgency in the Maghreb 2021 Niger attacks Gunmen raid the camp of a self-defence militia in the village of Bakorat, Niger, killing 25 people. (Reuters) 2021 Uganda bombings Three suicide bombers blow themselves up near a police station and the entrance of the Parliament in Kampala, killing three people and injuring 33 others. The Islamic State claims responsibility for the attacks. (Reuters) 2021 Armenia–Azerbaijan border crisis Fifteen Armenian soldiers are killed and twelve more are captured by the Azerbaijani Armed Forces during border clashes, amid mutual recriminations before a Russian-brokered ceasefire is agreed at 19:00 local time. (JAMnews) Business and economy Gas prices for the United Kingdom and the European Union increase by 17% after the German energy regulator suspends the approval of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline from Russia to Germany. The regulator says that the pipeline needs to comply with German law before they can certify the €10 billion project. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte orders the lifting of the mandate to use face shields in areas under Alert 3 and lower levels, which includes the National Capital Region. However, face shields will continue to be used in areas under Alert level 5 and areas under granular lockdown. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a new single-day record of 495 critical cases of COVID-19. (Yonhap News Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Russia, COVID-19 drug development Russia authorizes Pfizer to conduct clinical trials for its experimental COVID-19 drug named Paxlovid, which will continue until March 2023. (The Hill) COVID-19 pandemic in Ukraine Ukraine reports a record 838 deaths from COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 77,895. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in New Zealand New Zealand reports a record 222 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (New Zealand Herald) Deployment of COVID-19 vaccines The number of Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine doses supplied worldwide surpasses two billion. (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 drug development Pfizer and the Medicines Patent Pool sign a global licensing agreement that will allow Pfizer's experimental COVID-19 oral drug Paxlovid to be manufactured under a royalty-free license in 95 low and middle-income countries. (The Wall Street Journal) 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak Japan reports an outbreak of the H5N8 bird flu strain at a farm with about 11,000 egg-laying chickens in Izumi, Kagoshima Prefecture. (Reuters) A peer-reviewed study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine announces that an Argentinian woman has allegedly been "functionally cured" of HIV by her own immune system. If confirmed, the woman would be only the second individual in history whose own immune system successfully destroyed the disease without any form of stem-cell transplantation. (USA Today) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Migrants at a temporarily closed checkpoint in Ku?nica, Poland, throw stones at Polish border guards, while attempting to destroy the border fence in order to break through the Belarus–Poland border. The guards respond with water cannons and tear gas in an attempt to disperse the mob. The Polish ministry accuses the Belarusian military of aiding the attacks along Poland's borders. (BBC) Russo-Ukrainian War British Prime Minister Boris Johnson states that the west will have to choose between reliance on Russian gas and supporting Ukraine amid reported buildups of the Russian military near the border with Ukraine. (The Guardian) Belarus–European Union relations Researchers at the American cybersecurity firm Mandiant report that the Belarusian government has ties to the hacker group Ghostwriter, which was accused of targeting various German politicians and ministries in September and has since been accused of launching misinformation campaigns against Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Ukraine. (RFE/RL) Law and crime The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) Politics and elections Politics of Monaco Princess Charlene of Monaco cancels all upcoming activities, including those of Monaco's national celebrations, due to ill health, according to a statement from the royal palace. The Princess is said to be suffering from "deep fatigue". (Reuters) Pandora Papers The impeachment against Chilean President Sebastián Piñera is defeated in the Senate, after the motion fails to meet the minimum two-thirds threshold in a vote. (Bloomberg) Science and technology Moons of Saturn A new moon of Saturn, S/2019 S 1, is announced, bringing the total number of known moons to 83. (Minor Planet Center) November 15, 2021 (2021-11-15) (Monday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Insurgency in the Maghreb The death toll from yesterday's mass shooting at a military post near a gold mine in Inata, Soum Province, Burkina Faso, increases to 32, including 28 gendarmes and four civilians, making the attack the deadliest against security forces in the country. (Reuters) Liverpool Women's Hospital bombing Yesterday's taxi explosion in Liverpool, England, that killed the bomber and injured the driver outside the Liverpool Women's Hospital, is declared a terrorist incident by police. Mayor Joanne Anderson says that the driver locked the bomber inside the vehicle after noticing that the bomber was wearing an explosive device. (BBC News) (WalesOnline) Three al-Shabaab members escape from a maximum security prison in Kenya, including one of the perpetrators of the 2015 Garissa attack, in which 148 people were killed. (Reuters) Business and economy Infrastructure policy of the Joe Biden administration U.S. President Joe Biden signs the $1.2 trillion Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act into law. (The Washington Post) Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods Merritt, British Columbia, Canada is evacuated after severe flooding inundated the city of about 7,000. Several highways throughout southern British Columbia were also washed out by heavy rain, leaving at least 10 people stranded. (CBC) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Cambodia, Travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic Cambodia begins to allow fully vaccinated foreign travellers to visit the country without a quarantine if they show a negative test result from the previous 72 hours and test negative again upon arrival, as the country currently has the one of world's highest COVID-19 vaccination rates. (AFP via Barron's) COVID-19 pandemic in India, Travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic India reopens its border to fully vaccinated foreign travellers on regular commercial flights after being closed for 18 months since March 2020 due to a decrease in the number of new COVID-19 cases. All travellers must follow COVID-19 protocols and show a negative test result from the previous 72 hours, except those from countries with mutual vaccine recognition. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in Sri Lanka, COVID-19 drug development Sri Lanka approves the use of the COVID-19 oral drug molnupiravir in the country. (Adaderana) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany Berlin begins to implement "2G" rule that limiting access to restaurants, cinemas, bars, and cultural and entertainment venues to those who are vaccinated or have recovered from COVID-19 amid a rising number of COVID-19 cases across Germany. (VOA) COVID-19 pandemic in Latvia Latvia ends its 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. curfew and allows companies to fire employees who are unvaccinated against COVID-19. Unvaccinated people are also banned from taking their duties for parliament and entering shopping malls with a size greater than 1,500 square metres (16,000 sq ft). (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom, COVID-19 vaccination in the United Kingdom The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation approves the extension of age eligibility of COVID-19 vaccine booster doses in the United Kingdom to people between 40 and 49 years old and the second dose for teenagers between the ages of 16 and 17 years. (The Guardian) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Queensland Queensland reopens its state border to fully vaccinated Australians travelling by plane, as 70% of the state's adult population are now fully vaccinated. (ABC News Australia) COVID-19 pandemic in Egypt Egypt begins to ban unvaccinated public sector employees and university students from entering workplaces and universities unless they show a negative PCR test from the previous 72 hours. (Arab News) International relations China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) Foreign relations of Kiribati The government of New Zealand vows to help islanders in Banaba, Kiribati, to access fresh water, as the island suffers from frequent droughts and is dependent on rainfall. (RNZ) 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis The European Union says it will impose new sanctions on Belarus in response to the migrant crisis on the Belarus–Poland border. (CNN) Politics and elections 2021 Argentine legislative election With nearly all votes counted, the ruling Peronist government loses control of both the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. This is the first time since the return to democracy in 1983 that Peronists do not have a majority in either house. (El Mostrador Chile) Science and technology Russia carries out a direct-ascent anti-satellite weapon test on the defunct Soviet spacecraft Kosmos 1408, creating a cloud of debris that threatens the International Space Station. (SpaceNews) November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) (Sunday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Insurgency in the Maghreb Gunmen open fire at a military post near a gold mine in Inata, Soum Province, Burkina Faso, killing 19 gendarmes and a civilian. (Al Jazeera) Liverpool Women's Hospital bombing A passenger is killed and his driver injured when a taxi explodes in front of the Liverpool Women's Hospital in Liverpool, England. Three men are subsequently arrested under the Terrorism Act. (BBC News) Syrian civil war A bomb explodes near a vehicle carrying troops in Deir ez-Zor, Syria, killing four soldiers and a general. (The New Arab) Somali Civil War; Capital punishment in Somalia Two Ugandan soldiers are sentenced to death and three more receive 39-year prison sentences in Somalia for killing seven civilians during a gun battle in Golweyn, Lower Shabelle, three months ago. (BBC News) Disasters and accidents Astroworld Festival crowd crush A 9-year-old boy, injured during a crowd crush at the Astroworld Music Festival, who had been in a medically-induced coma, dies, bringing the death toll to 10. (CNN) European migrant crisis Eight sub-Saharan African migrants are found dead on a boat adrift off the southern coast of the Canary Islands, with 54 other men being rescued from the boat. (El País) A fire at a COVID-19 ward in Sliven, Bulgaria, kills three patients. (ABC News) A magnitude 6.5 earthquake strikes Hormozgan Province, Iran, at a depth of 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) and is felt in many southern Iranian cities. A man killed by a falling pole is the sole death reported. (Reuters) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg announces a nationwide lockdown for those over the age of 12 years who are unvaccinated against COVID-19, which prohibits them from leaving their homes except for essential reasons beginning at midnight, amid a record increase in new COVID-19 cases. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in Egypt, COVID-19 vaccination in Egypt The Egyptian government announces the start of clinical trials for COVI-VAX, which is the country’s first domestically-made COVID-19 vaccine. (Ahram Online) COVID-19 pandemic in Israel, COVID-19 vaccination in Israel The Israeli Health ministry approves the usage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children aged 5 to 11, two weeks after the U.S. FDA grants its own approval, with vaccination expected to begin next week. (Haaretz) COVID-19 pandemic in Peru Peru announces that people over the age of 18 years who want to enter indoor spaces must show a proof of full vaccination against COVID-19 beginning in December, either physical or virtual vaccination cards. (AFP via Barron's) Politics and elections 2021 Bulgarian general election Bulgarians go to the polls to elect the President and the National Assembly. (MSN) 2021 Argentine legislative election Argentines go to the polls to elect members of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. (24/7 News Agency) More November 2021 events... Time: 18:45 UTC|Day: 20 November ?November 2021? S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 More November 2021 events...    About this page Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia Ongoing events Disasters Climate crisis COVID-19 pandemic 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak 2021 Atlantic hurricane season 2021 Pacific typhoon season Madagascar food crisis Water crisis in Iran Yemeni famine 2021 La Palma eruption Economic 2020–2021 global chip shortage 2021 global supply chain crisis COVID-19 recession Lebanese liquidity crisis Pandora Papers leak Turkish currency and debt crisis United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Politics Belarus?European Union border crisis Brazilian protests Colombian tax reform protests Eswatini protests Haitian protests Indian farmers' protests Insulate Britain protests Jersey dispute Libyan peace process Malaysian political crisis Myanmar protests Nicaraguan protests Nigerian protests Persian Gulf crisis Peruvian crisis Romanian political crisis Russian election protests Tigrayan peace process Thai protests Tunisian political crisis United States racial unrest Venezuelan presidential crisis edit section Elections and referendums Recent November 7: Nicaragua, President, National Assembly 14: Bulgaria, President (1st), National Assembly 14: Argentina, Chamber of Deputies, Senate 18: Tonga, Legislative Assembly Upcoming November 21: Bulgaria, President (2nd) 21: Chile, President, Senate, Chamber of Deputies 28: Honduras, President, National Congress 28: Kyrgyzstan, Supreme Council December 4: The Gambia, President edit section Trials Recently concluded Belarus: Maria Kalesnikava France: Nicolas Sarkozy Myanmar: Danny Fenster Rwanda: Paul Rusesabagina United States: Kyle Rittenhouse, Yanjun Xu, Lev Parnas, R. Kelly, Robert Durst Ongoing Armenia: Serzh Sargsyan Belarus: Sergei Tikhanovsky Canada: Raj Grewal France: Brussels ISIL Indonesia: Nurdin Abdullah Israel: Benjamin Netanyahu Italy: Matteo Salvini Kyrgyzstan: Almazbek Atambayev Malta: Yorgen Fenech Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi Philippines: Leila de Lima Sudan: Omar al-Bashir United States: Elizabeth Holmes, Death of Ahmaud Arbery Upcoming Indonesia: Azis Syamsuddin, Alex Noerdin Kosovo: Hashim Thaçi, Kadri Veseli Lesotho: Maesiah Thabane United States: Allen Weisselberg, Ghislaine Maxwell, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Jussie Smollett Vatican City: Giovanni Angelo Becciu ICC: Ali Kushayb edit section Sport Association football 2021–22 UEFA Europa League 2021–22 UEFA Champions league 2021–22 Premier League 2021–22 Bundesliga 2021–22 Serie A 2021–22 La Liga 2021 Copa Libertadores final stages 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification 2020–21 UEFA Nations League 2021 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A 2021 MLS Cup Playoffs Women's association football 2021 NWSL season American football 2021 NCAA Division I FBS football season 2021 NCAA Division I FCS football season 2021 NFL season Baseball 2021 NPB season Basketball 2021–22 NBA season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Women's Basketball Season Cricket 2021–23 ICC World Test Championship 2020–23 ICC Cricket World Cup Super League 2019–23 ICC Cricket World Cup League 2 2019–22 ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League  Canadian football 2021 CFL season Golf 2021 European Tour 2021 LPGA Tour 2020 PGA Tour Champions 2021 Ladies European Tour 2021–22 PGA Tour Ice hockey 2021–22 NHL season 2021–22 IIHF Continental Cup Motorsport 2021 Formula One Championship 2021 Rally Championship 2021 MotoGP 2021 Supercars Championship Rugby union 2021–22 Premiership Rugby 2021–22 United Rugby Championship 2021–22 Top 14 2021 Bunnings NPC 2021 Super Rugby season Tennis 2021 ATP Tour 2021 WTA Tour 2020–21 Davis Cup (Finals) Other sports seasons 2021–22 International cricket season 2021–22 snooker season 2021–22 curling season More details – current sports events edit section Recent deaths November 18: Mick Rock 18: Ardeshir Zahedi 17: Young Dolph 16: Ri Yong-suk 15: Clarissa Eden 15: Daulet Sembaev 14: Etel Adnan 13: Sam Huff 13: Wilbur Smith 12: Matthew Festing 11: F. W. de Klerk 11: Glen de Vries 11: Graeme Edge 11: Winter 10: Jun Hong Lu 9: Max Cleland 9: Austin Currie 8: Pedro Feliciano 8: Seán FitzPatrick 8: Mahlagha Mallah 8: Abdul Wahab Dalimunthe 7: Dean Stockwell 6: Angelo Mosca 6: Shawn Rhoden 6: Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé 6: Muamer Zukorli? 6: Yukhym Zvyahilsky 5: Marília Mendonça 4: Ruth Ann Minner 4: Lionel Blair 3: Georgie Dann 2: Sabah Fakhri 1: Aaron Beck October 31: Catherine Tizard 30: Jerry Remy 30: Alan Davidson 30: Bert Newton 29: Clément Mouamba 29: Iran Darroudi 29: Ashley Mallett 29: José Antonio González 27: Michael Laughlin 26: Mort Sahl 26: Walter Smith 26: Roh Tae-woo 25: Alfredo Diez Nieto 25: Fofi Gennimata 24: Arnold Hano 24: James Michael Tyler 24: John Traynor 24: Erna de Vries 22: Jay Black 22: Peter Scolari 22: Udo Zimmermann 21: Yasin Abu Bakr 21: George Butler 21: Martha Henry 21: Halyna Hutchins edit section Ongoing conflicts Africa Angola Cabinda War Cameroon Anglophone Crisis Central African Republic Civil War Chad Insurgency in Northern Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Kivu conflict Allied Democratic Forces insurgency Ituri conflict Lord's Resistance Army insurgency Kamwina Nsapu rebellion Ethiopia Tigray War (spillover) Oromo conflict Ethiopia and Sudan Sudanese–Ethiopian clashes Ghana Western Togoland Rebellion Maghreb and Sahel regions Maghreb insurgency Mali Mali War Mozambique Insurgency in Cabo Delgado Nigeria Boko Haram insurgency (incl. Lake Chad region) Communal conflicts in Nigeria Senegal Casamance conflict Somalia Civil war South Sudan Ethnic violence in South Sudan Sudan War in Darfur South Kordofan conflict Sudanese nomadic conflicts (incl. South Sudan) Tunisia ISIL insurgency in Tunisia Western Sahara Western Sahara conflict 2020–2021 Western Saharan clashes Americas Colombia Colombian conflict Mexico Mexican drug war Peru Internal conflict in Peru Paraguay Insurgency in Paraguay Asia-Pacific Afghanistan Panjshir conflict Islamic State–Taliban conflict India Insurgency in Northeast India Assam separatist movements Insurgency in Manipur Ethnic conflict in Nagaland Khalistan movement Naxalite–Maoist insurgency India and Pakistan Kashmir conflict Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines Moro conflict Cross border attacks in Sabah Indonesia Papua conflict Myanmar Internal conflict in Myanmar Kachin conflict Karen conflict Rohingya conflict Pakistan Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Insurgency in Balochistan Philippines Communist rebellion Philippine drug war Thailand South Thailand insurgency Europe Armenia and Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Ukraine War in Donbas Russo-Ukrainian War Ireland and the UK Dissident Irish republican campaign Turkey Kurdish–Turkish conflict Global War on terror Middle East Egypt Sinai insurgency Iran and the Persian Gulf Iran–Israel proxy conflict Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict Sistan and Baluchestan insurgency Arab separatism in Khuzestan Kurdish separatism in Iran Iraq Iraqi conflict American-led intervention in Iraq Iranian intervention in Iraq Iraq and Syria (map) International military intervention against ISIL Israel and Gaza Israel and Syria Israeli-Syrian border conflict Israeli-Syrian ceasefire line incidents Syria American-led intervention in Syria Russian military intervention in the Syrian civil war Turkish occupation of northern Syria Yemen and Saudi Arabia Yemeni Civil War Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen Houthi–Saudi Arabian conflict Further information: List of ongoing armed conflicts edit section 2021 events and developments by topic Arts Architecture – Animation – Anime – Comics – Film (Horror, Science fiction) – Home video – Literature – Music (Classical, Country, Hip hop, Latin, Metal, Rock, UK, US) – Radio – Television (UK, US, Italy, Scotland) – Video games Politics and government Elections – International leaders – Sovereign states – Sovereign state leaders – Territorial governors Science and technology Archaeology – Biotechnology – Computing – Palaeontology – Quantum computing and communication – Senescence research – Sustainable energy research – Space/Astronomy – Spaceflight Environment and environmental sciences Birding/Ornithology – Climate change Transportation Aviation – Rail transport By place Afghanistan – Albania – Algeria – Andorra – Angola – Antarctica – Argentina – Armenia – Australia – Austria – Azerbaijan – Bangladesh – The Bahamas – Bahrain – Barbados – Belarus – Belgium – Benin – Bhutan – Bolivia – Bosnia and Herzegovina – Botswana – Brazil – Bulgaria – Burkina Faso – Burundi – Cambodia – Cameroon – Canada – Cape Verde – Central African Republic – Chad – Chile – China – Colombia – Costa Rica – Comoros – Croatia – Cuba – Cyprus – Czech Republic – Denmark – Ecuador – Egypt – El Salvador – Eritrea – Estonia – Ethiopia – European Union – Eswatini – Fiji – Finland – France – Gabon – Georgia – Germany – Ghana – Greece – Guatemala – Guinea – Guinea-Bissau – Guyana – Haiti – Honduras – Hong Kong – Hungary – Iceland – India – Indonesia – Iran – Iraq – Ireland – Israel – Italy – Ivory Coast – Japan – Jordan – Kazakhstan – Kenya – Kiribati – Kosovo – Kuwait – Kyrgyzstan – Laos – Latvia – Lebanon – Lesotho – Liberia – Libya – Lithuania – Luxembourg – Macau – Madagascar – Marshall Islands – Malawi – Malaysia – Mali – Malta – Mauritania – Mexico – Micronesia – Moldova – Mongolia – Montenegro – Morocco – Mozambique – Myanmar – Nauru – Namibia – Nepal – Netherlands – New Zealand – Nicaragua – Niger – Nigeria – North Korea – North Macedonia – Norway – Oman – Pakistan – Palau – Palestine – Panama – Papua New Guinea – Paraguay – Peru – Philippines – Poland – Portugal – Qatar – Romania – Russia – Rwanda – Samoa – Saudi Arabia – Senegal – Serbia – Seychelles – Singapore – Slovakia – Slovenia – Somalia – South Africa – Solomon Islands – South Korea – South Sudan – Spain – Sri Lanka – Sudan – Sweden – Switzerland – Syria – Taiwan – Tajikistan – Tanzania – Thailand – Togo – Tonga – Tunisia – Turkey – Turkmenistan – Tuvalu – Uganda – Ukraine – United Arab Emirates – United Kingdom – United States – Uruguay – Uzbekistan – Vanuatu – Venezuela – Vietnam – Yemen – Zambia – Zimbabwe Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments – Disestablishments Works and introductions categories Works – Introductions – Works entering the public domain Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2021. ...more edit section v t e Events by month 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2001 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2000 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1999 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1998 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1997 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1996 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1995 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1994 January February March April May June July August September October November December Portal:Current events Calendars Content listings Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured content Good articles Spoken articles Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Current_events&oldid=1054047874" Categories: All portals 2021 by day Current events portal 2021 Current events History portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages protected against vandalism Portals with triaged subpages from October 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Ænglisc ??????? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????? Banjar Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ??????? Bikol Central Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Dansk ?????? ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? IsiZulu Íslenska Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Li Niha Limburgs Magyar ?????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau ?????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Nederlands ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ????????? Piemontèis Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? ??? ?????????? ???? Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zeêuws ?? Dagbanli Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 19:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events Portal:Current events - Wikipedia Portal:Current events From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (October 2020) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events Edit instructions Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths Topics in the news SpaceX Crew-3 launch Kosmos 1408 is destroyed by a Russian anti-satellite weapon and becomes a cloud of space debris. We Continue the Change, led by Kiril Petkov and Asen Vasilev, wins the most seats in the Bulgarian general election. SpaceX's Crew-3 mission (launch pictured) takes four astronauts to the International Space Station. Former South African president F. W. de Klerk, who negotiated the end of apartheid with Nelson Mandela, dies at the age of 85. Ongoing: Belarus–European Union border crisis COVID-19 pandemic Recent deaths: Dzifa Attivor Young Dolph Julio Lugo Ed Bullins Bertie Auld Seán FitzPatrick Nominate an article November 20, 2021 (2021-11-20) (Saturday) edit history watch Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 22,936 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) COVID-19 pandemic in Hong Kong, COVID-19 vaccination in Hong Kong Hong Kong authorises the usage of the Sinovac CoronaVac vaccine for children aged 3 to 17 years old. (The Guardian) Water crisis in Iran, 2016–2021 Iranian protests Thousands of people gather at Isfahan's Khaju Bridge to protest the government's water and energy politics. (Al Jazeera) Law and crime Two people are shot and seriously wounded by police during protests against COVID-19 measures in Rotterdam, Netherlands. Fifty-one more are arrested, half of whom are aged under 18. (Reuters) November 19, 2021 (2021-11-19) (Friday) edit history watch Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The provincial government of British Columbia, Canada, declares a state of emergency in response to ongoing risks from floods and mudslides. Effective immediately until December 1, citizens in affected regions, including the Lower Mainland and Vancouver Island, are limited to 30 litres of diesel and gasoline purchased at fuel stations. Vehicles used for essential services, such as emergency response, commercial transport, and public transit, are exempt from this order and granted unlimited access to cardlock gas stations ordinarily used by the commercial trucking industry. Price gouging at retail gas stations and the resale of fuel is prohibited. Restrictions on non-essential travel along damaged highways are also set in place. (Global News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austrian chancellor Alexander Schallenberg announces a full nationwide lockdown for the entire population starting on 22 November, amid a surge in new COVID-19 cases that has overwhelmed hospitals. Schallenberg also announces that COVID-19 vaccinations will become mandatory as of 1 February 2022. (The Independent) Austria reports a record for the second consecutive day of 15,809 new cases of COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,027,274. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany The southern German state of Bavaria cancels all Christmas markets and imposes a lockdown in all districts that have a seven-day incidence rate of over 1,000 per 100,000 people amid a substantial increase in the number of new COVID-19 cases. However, schools and kindergartens will continue to remain open. (Deutsche Welle) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 11,289 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 998,488. (Budapest Business Journal) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the third consecutive day of 1,254 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 261,589. (Interfax) COVID-19 pandemic in North America COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada approves the usage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (Global News) COVID-19 pandemic in Grenada Argentina officially announces that it will donate 11,000 doses of the Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine to Grenada. (Memo) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Victoria Restrictions are further eased for fully vaccinated Victorians as 90% of adults are now fully vaccinated. Mask wearing is still required in some indoor spaces and limits remain on daily visitor numbers to care facilities. Additionally, unvaccinated people continue to be banned from entering all non-essential businesses and also from employment in many industries. (The Guardian) International relations Palestine–United Kingdom relations The United Kingdom outlaws Hamas, the Palestinian militant group which serves as the ruling party of the Gaza Strip, and declares the party as a terrorist group. Previously, only the party's armed wing was outlawed. (Reuters) Law and crime Kenosha unrest shooting Kyle Rittenhouse, an 18-year-old who shot three people during the Kenosha unrest in Wisconsin, United States, in August 2020, is found not guilty on all counts. (NPR) Hundreds of people marched in Chicago, New York City and Portland to protest the verdict of the trial. (CBS) (CBS), (ABC) Politics and elections Iraqi Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr announces that he is dissolving the Promised Day Brigade, the armed faction loyal to him. Yesterday, al-Sadr said that non-governmental armed militias should hand in their weapons. (Reuters) Vice Presidency of Kamala Harris While Joe Biden undergoes medical treatment, Kamala Harris gains presidential power for a short period of time, making her the first female acting president in the United States. (Forbes) November 18, 2021 (2021-11-18) (Thursday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) Arts and culture 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany COVID-19 vaccination in Germany The Standing Committee on Vaccination recommends that a booster dose of an mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine should be given to all adults over the age of 18 years. (Deutsche Welle) Germany reports a record for the second consecutive day of 65,371 new cases of COVID-19. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 15,145 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,011,465. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis announces that beginning on November 22, unvaccinated people will be banned from entering all indoor venues for which they could previously present a negative test result, due to an increase in new COVID-19 cases. Mitsotakis also announces that vaccine passports will expire after seven months for people over the age of 60 years and urges people in this age group to receive a booster dose. (Greek Reporter) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands The Netherlands reports a record for the fourth consecutive day of 23,860 new cases of COVID-19. (Dutch News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the second consecutive day of 1,251 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 260,335. (The Moscow Times) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Laos Laos reports a record 1,041 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 58,798. (Vietnam Plus) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 3,292 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 406,605. (The Korea Herald) A lab in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States, is placed on temporary lockdown by the CDC after several vials labeled "smallpox" are discovered in a freezer. (CBS News) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Belarus suspends electricity supplies to Ukraine, in "accordance with the established procedure for interaction within the framework of contractual relations", according to a statement from the Belarusian Ministry of Energy. (Ukranews) Law and crime At the Birmingham Crown Court in England, Zephaniah McLeod is sentenced to at least 21 years imprisonment for manslaughter and four counts of attempted murder after killing one person and wounding seven others during a 90-minute stabbing spree in September 2020. (BBC News) The New York Supreme Court vacates the convictions of Muhammad Abdul Aziz (formerly Norman 3X Butler) and the late Khalil Islam (formerly Thomas 15X Johnson) for the 1965 assassination of Malcolm X. The two men were convicted alongside Thomas Hagan (formerly Talmadge Hayer) in 1966. An investigation led by Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr. discovered that the FBI and the NYPD had withheld evidence that would have acquitted Aziz and Islam. (The New York Times) Politics and elections 2021 Tongan general election Tongans go to the polls to elect their new government. (RNZ) November 17, 2021 (2021-11-17) (Wednesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Sudanese coup d'état Soldiers open fire on civilians in Khartoum, Sudan, protesting against last month's coup d'état, killing 14 people and injuring dozens more. This brings the total death toll of civilians killed during the protests to 38. (Al Jazeera) Insurgency in the Maghreb The death toll from the attack at a military post in Inata, Soum Province, Burkina Faso, three days ago, increases to 53, including 49 gendarmes and four civilians. (Al Jazeera) 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis; Estonia–Russia barrier Estonia summons 1,700 reservists for a snap drill, which will include installing a 40-kilometer-long razor wire barrier along the border with Russia as the migrant crisis with Belarus intensifies. (Reuters) Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The Canadian government sends the Air Force to the Pacific coast to assist with supplies after torrential rains affected regions of British Columbia near Vancouver, causing damage to highways. Minister of Emergency Preparedness Bill Blair says that landslides and floods have blocked the town of Agassiz and residents are now being assisted by the military. (Al Jazeera) A Royal Air Force F-35 Lightning II jet crashes into the Mediterranean Sea during a routine operation. The pilot successfully ejects from the aircraft and has been rescued. (The Guardian) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom COVID-19 pandemic in Northern Ireland The Northern Ireland Executive votes to introduce a COVID-19 vaccine passport beginning next month, which will contain a person's vaccination status or negative COVID-19 test result, and will be used to enter bars, restaurants and pubs. (BBC News) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 14,416 new COVID-19 cases in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 996,320. (ORF) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany Germany reports a record 52,826 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record 1,247 deaths from COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 259,084. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Spain, COVID-19 vaccination in Spain Spain’s panel of vaccine experts approves the extension of the COVID-19 vaccine booster dose to people between the ages of 60 and 69 and healthcare workers. (The Washington Post) COVID-19 pandemic in Argentina COVID-19 vaccination in Argentina Argentina receives a shipment of 800,000 doses of the Sinopharm COVID-19 vaccine. (Ámbito) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines The Food and Drug Administration of the Philippines authorises emergency use of the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine, which will be included in the national vaccination program. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States COVID-19 vaccination in the United States White House COVID-19 Response Coordinator Jeff Zients announces that 80% of people aged 12 and older have received their first doses of the COVID-19 vaccine. (USA Today) (WNCN) Politics and elections Former President of Georgia Mikheil Saakashvili, who has been on a hunger strike for 48 days, is in critical condition. Yesterday, Justice Minister Rati Bregadze denied Saakashvili transfer to a civilian clinic, from a prison hospital where he is being treated. (France 24) November 16, 2021 (2021-11-16) (Tuesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Insurgency in the Maghreb 2021 Niger attacks Gunmen raid the camp of a self-defence militia in the village of Bakorat, Niger, killing 25 people. (Reuters) 2021 Uganda bombings Three suicide bombers blow themselves up near a police station and the entrance of the Parliament in Kampala, killing three people and injuring 33 others. The Islamic State claims responsibility for the attacks. (Reuters) 2021 Armenia–Azerbaijan border crisis Fifteen Armenian soldiers are killed and twelve more are captured by the Azerbaijani Armed Forces during border clashes, amid mutual recriminations before a Russian-brokered ceasefire is agreed at 19:00 local time. (JAMnews) Business and economy Gas prices for the United Kingdom and the European Union increase by 17% after the German energy regulator suspends the approval of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline from Russia to Germany. The regulator says that the pipeline needs to comply with German law before they can certify the €10 billion project. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte orders the lifting of the mandate to use face shields in areas under Alert 3 and lower levels, which includes the National Capital Region. However, face shields will continue to be used in areas under Alert level 5 and areas under granular lockdown. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a new single-day record of 495 critical cases of COVID-19. (Yonhap News Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Russia, COVID-19 drug development Russia authorizes Pfizer to conduct clinical trials for its experimental COVID-19 drug named Paxlovid, which will continue until March 2023. (The Hill) COVID-19 pandemic in Ukraine Ukraine reports a record 838 deaths from COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 77,895. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in New Zealand New Zealand reports a record 222 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (New Zealand Herald) Deployment of COVID-19 vaccines The number of Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine doses supplied worldwide surpasses two billion. (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 drug development Pfizer and the Medicines Patent Pool sign a global licensing agreement that will allow Pfizer's experimental COVID-19 oral drug Paxlovid to be manufactured under a royalty-free license in 95 low and middle-income countries. (The Wall Street Journal) 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak Japan reports an outbreak of the H5N8 bird flu strain at a farm with about 11,000 egg-laying chickens in Izumi, Kagoshima Prefecture. (Reuters) A peer-reviewed study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine announces that an Argentinian woman has allegedly been "functionally cured" of HIV by her own immune system. If confirmed, the woman would be only the second individual in history whose own immune system successfully destroyed the disease without any form of stem-cell transplantation. (USA Today) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Migrants at a temporarily closed checkpoint in Ku?nica, Poland, throw stones at Polish border guards, while attempting to destroy the border fence in order to break through the Belarus–Poland border. The guards respond with water cannons and tear gas in an attempt to disperse the mob. The Polish ministry accuses the Belarusian military of aiding the attacks along Poland's borders. (BBC) Russo-Ukrainian War British Prime Minister Boris Johnson states that the west will have to choose between reliance on Russian gas and supporting Ukraine amid reported buildups of the Russian military near the border with Ukraine. (The Guardian) Belarus–European Union relations Researchers at the American cybersecurity firm Mandiant report that the Belarusian government has ties to the hacker group Ghostwriter, which was accused of targeting various German politicians and ministries in September and has since been accused of launching misinformation campaigns against Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Ukraine. (RFE/RL) Law and crime The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) Politics and elections Politics of Monaco Princess Charlene of Monaco cancels all upcoming activities, including those of Monaco's national celebrations, due to ill health, according to a statement from the royal palace. The Princess is said to be suffering from "deep fatigue". (Reuters) Pandora Papers The impeachment against Chilean President Sebastián Piñera is defeated in the Senate, after the motion fails to meet the minimum two-thirds threshold in a vote. (Bloomberg) Science and technology Moons of Saturn A new moon of Saturn, S/2019 S 1, is announced, bringing the total number of known moons to 83. (Minor Planet Center) November 15, 2021 (2021-11-15) (Monday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Insurgency in the Maghreb The death toll from yesterday's mass shooting at a military post near a gold mine in Inata, Soum Province, Burkina Faso, increases to 32, including 28 gendarmes and four civilians, making the attack the deadliest against security forces in the country. (Reuters) Liverpool Women's Hospital bombing Yesterday's taxi explosion in Liverpool, England, that killed the bomber and injured the driver outside the Liverpool Women's Hospital, is declared a terrorist incident by police. Mayor Joanne Anderson says that the driver locked the bomber inside the vehicle after noticing that the bomber was wearing an explosive device. (BBC News) (WalesOnline) Three al-Shabaab members escape from a maximum security prison in Kenya, including one of the perpetrators of the 2015 Garissa attack, in which 148 people were killed. (Reuters) Business and economy Infrastructure policy of the Joe Biden administration U.S. President Joe Biden signs the $1.2 trillion Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act into law. (The Washington Post) Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods Merritt, British Columbia, Canada is evacuated after severe flooding inundated the city of about 7,000. Several highways throughout southern British Columbia were also washed out by heavy rain, leaving at least 10 people stranded. (CBC) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Cambodia, Travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic Cambodia begins to allow fully vaccinated foreign travellers to visit the country without a quarantine if they show a negative test result from the previous 72 hours and test negative again upon arrival, as the country currently has the one of world's highest COVID-19 vaccination rates. (AFP via Barron's) COVID-19 pandemic in India, Travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic India reopens its border to fully vaccinated foreign travellers on regular commercial flights after being closed for 18 months since March 2020 due to a decrease in the number of new COVID-19 cases. All travellers must follow COVID-19 protocols and show a negative test result from the previous 72 hours, except those from countries with mutual vaccine recognition. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in Sri Lanka, COVID-19 drug development Sri Lanka approves the use of the COVID-19 oral drug molnupiravir in the country. (Adaderana) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany Berlin begins to implement "2G" rule that limiting access to restaurants, cinemas, bars, and cultural and entertainment venues to those who are vaccinated or have recovered from COVID-19 amid a rising number of COVID-19 cases across Germany. (VOA) COVID-19 pandemic in Latvia Latvia ends its 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. curfew and allows companies to fire employees who are unvaccinated against COVID-19. Unvaccinated people are also banned from taking their duties for parliament and entering shopping malls with a size greater than 1,500 square metres (16,000 sq ft). (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom, COVID-19 vaccination in the United Kingdom The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation approves the extension of age eligibility of COVID-19 vaccine booster doses in the United Kingdom to people between 40 and 49 years old and the second dose for teenagers between the ages of 16 and 17 years. (The Guardian) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Queensland Queensland reopens its state border to fully vaccinated Australians travelling by plane, as 70% of the state's adult population are now fully vaccinated. (ABC News Australia) COVID-19 pandemic in Egypt Egypt begins to ban unvaccinated public sector employees and university students from entering workplaces and universities unless they show a negative PCR test from the previous 72 hours. (Arab News) International relations China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) Foreign relations of Kiribati The government of New Zealand vows to help islanders in Banaba, Kiribati, to access fresh water, as the island suffers from frequent droughts and is dependent on rainfall. (RNZ) 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis The European Union says it will impose new sanctions on Belarus in response to the migrant crisis on the Belarus–Poland border. (CNN) Politics and elections 2021 Argentine legislative election With nearly all votes counted, the ruling Peronist government loses control of both the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. This is the first time since the return to democracy in 1983 that Peronists do not have a majority in either house. (El Mostrador Chile) Science and technology Russia carries out a direct-ascent anti-satellite weapon test on the defunct Soviet spacecraft Kosmos 1408, creating a cloud of debris that threatens the International Space Station. (SpaceNews) November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) (Sunday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Insurgency in the Maghreb Gunmen open fire at a military post near a gold mine in Inata, Soum Province, Burkina Faso, killing 19 gendarmes and a civilian. (Al Jazeera) Liverpool Women's Hospital bombing A passenger is killed and his driver injured when a taxi explodes in front of the Liverpool Women's Hospital in Liverpool, England. Three men are subsequently arrested under the Terrorism Act. (BBC News) Syrian civil war A bomb explodes near a vehicle carrying troops in Deir ez-Zor, Syria, killing four soldiers and a general. (The New Arab) Somali Civil War; Capital punishment in Somalia Two Ugandan soldiers are sentenced to death and three more receive 39-year prison sentences in Somalia for killing seven civilians during a gun battle in Golweyn, Lower Shabelle, three months ago. (BBC News) Disasters and accidents Astroworld Festival crowd crush A 9-year-old boy, injured during a crowd crush at the Astroworld Music Festival, who had been in a medically-induced coma, dies, bringing the death toll to 10. (CNN) European migrant crisis Eight sub-Saharan African migrants are found dead on a boat adrift off the southern coast of the Canary Islands, with 54 other men being rescued from the boat. (El País) A fire at a COVID-19 ward in Sliven, Bulgaria, kills three patients. (ABC News) A magnitude 6.5 earthquake strikes Hormozgan Province, Iran, at a depth of 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) and is felt in many southern Iranian cities. A man killed by a falling pole is the sole death reported. (Reuters) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg announces a nationwide lockdown for those over the age of 12 years who are unvaccinated against COVID-19, which prohibits them from leaving their homes except for essential reasons beginning at midnight, amid a record increase in new COVID-19 cases. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in Egypt, COVID-19 vaccination in Egypt The Egyptian government announces the start of clinical trials for COVI-VAX, which is the country’s first domestically-made COVID-19 vaccine. (Ahram Online) COVID-19 pandemic in Israel, COVID-19 vaccination in Israel The Israeli Health ministry approves the usage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children aged 5 to 11, two weeks after the U.S. FDA grants its own approval, with vaccination expected to begin next week. (Haaretz) COVID-19 pandemic in Peru Peru announces that people over the age of 18 years who want to enter indoor spaces must show a proof of full vaccination against COVID-19 beginning in December, either physical or virtual vaccination cards. (AFP via Barron's) Politics and elections 2021 Bulgarian general election Bulgarians go to the polls to elect the President and the National Assembly. (MSN) 2021 Argentine legislative election Argentines go to the polls to elect members of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. (24/7 News Agency) More November 2021 events... Time: 18:45 UTC|Day: 20 November ?November 2021? S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 More November 2021 events...    About this page Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia Ongoing events Disasters Climate crisis COVID-19 pandemic 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak 2021 Atlantic hurricane season 2021 Pacific typhoon season Madagascar food crisis Water crisis in Iran Yemeni famine 2021 La Palma eruption Economic 2020–2021 global chip shortage 2021 global supply chain crisis COVID-19 recession Lebanese liquidity crisis Pandora Papers leak Turkish currency and debt crisis United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Politics Belarus?European Union border crisis Brazilian protests Colombian tax reform protests Eswatini protests Haitian protests Indian farmers' protests Insulate Britain protests Jersey dispute Libyan peace process Malaysian political crisis Myanmar protests Nicaraguan protests Nigerian protests Persian Gulf crisis Peruvian crisis Romanian political crisis Russian election protests Tigrayan peace process Thai protests Tunisian political crisis United States racial unrest Venezuelan presidential crisis edit section Elections and referendums Recent November 7: Nicaragua, President, National Assembly 14: Bulgaria, President (1st), National Assembly 14: Argentina, Chamber of Deputies, Senate 18: Tonga, Legislative Assembly Upcoming November 21: Bulgaria, President (2nd) 21: Chile, President, Senate, Chamber of Deputies 28: Honduras, President, National Congress 28: Kyrgyzstan, Supreme Council December 4: The Gambia, President edit section Trials Recently concluded Belarus: Maria Kalesnikava France: Nicolas Sarkozy Myanmar: Danny Fenster Rwanda: Paul Rusesabagina United States: Kyle Rittenhouse, Yanjun Xu, Lev Parnas, R. Kelly, Robert Durst Ongoing Armenia: Serzh Sargsyan Belarus: Sergei Tikhanovsky Canada: Raj Grewal France: Brussels ISIL Indonesia: Nurdin Abdullah Israel: Benjamin Netanyahu Italy: Matteo Salvini Kyrgyzstan: Almazbek Atambayev Malta: Yorgen Fenech Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi Philippines: Leila de Lima Sudan: Omar al-Bashir United States: Elizabeth Holmes, Death of Ahmaud Arbery Upcoming Indonesia: Azis Syamsuddin, Alex Noerdin Kosovo: Hashim Thaçi, Kadri Veseli Lesotho: Maesiah Thabane United States: Allen Weisselberg, Ghislaine Maxwell, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Jussie Smollett Vatican City: Giovanni Angelo Becciu ICC: Ali Kushayb edit section Sport Association football 2021–22 UEFA Europa League 2021–22 UEFA Champions league 2021–22 Premier League 2021–22 Bundesliga 2021–22 Serie A 2021–22 La Liga 2021 Copa Libertadores final stages 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification 2020–21 UEFA Nations League 2021 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A 2021 MLS Cup Playoffs Women's association football 2021 NWSL season American football 2021 NCAA Division I FBS football season 2021 NCAA Division I FCS football season 2021 NFL season Baseball 2021 NPB season Basketball 2021–22 NBA season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Women's Basketball Season Cricket 2021–23 ICC World Test Championship 2020–23 ICC Cricket World Cup Super League 2019–23 ICC Cricket World Cup League 2 2019–22 ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League  Canadian football 2021 CFL season Golf 2021 European Tour 2021 LPGA Tour 2020 PGA Tour Champions 2021 Ladies European Tour 2021–22 PGA Tour Ice hockey 2021–22 NHL season 2021–22 IIHF Continental Cup Motorsport 2021 Formula One Championship 2021 Rally Championship 2021 MotoGP 2021 Supercars Championship Rugby union 2021–22 Premiership Rugby 2021–22 United Rugby Championship 2021–22 Top 14 2021 Bunnings NPC 2021 Super Rugby season Tennis 2021 ATP Tour 2021 WTA Tour 2020–21 Davis Cup (Finals) Other sports seasons 2021–22 International cricket season 2021–22 snooker season 2021–22 curling season More details – current sports events edit section Recent deaths November 18: Mick Rock 18: Ardeshir Zahedi 17: Young Dolph 16: Ri Yong-suk 15: Clarissa Eden 15: Daulet Sembaev 14: Etel Adnan 13: Sam Huff 13: Wilbur Smith 12: Matthew Festing 11: F. W. de Klerk 11: Glen de Vries 11: Graeme Edge 11: Winter 10: Jun Hong Lu 9: Max Cleland 9: Austin Currie 8: Pedro Feliciano 8: Seán FitzPatrick 8: Mahlagha Mallah 8: Abdul Wahab Dalimunthe 7: Dean Stockwell 6: Angelo Mosca 6: Shawn Rhoden 6: Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé 6: Muamer Zukorli? 6: Yukhym Zvyahilsky 5: Marília Mendonça 4: Ruth Ann Minner 4: Lionel Blair 3: Georgie Dann 2: Sabah Fakhri 1: Aaron Beck October 31: Catherine Tizard 30: Jerry Remy 30: Alan Davidson 30: Bert Newton 29: Clément Mouamba 29: Iran Darroudi 29: Ashley Mallett 29: José Antonio González 27: Michael Laughlin 26: Mort Sahl 26: Walter Smith 26: Roh Tae-woo 25: Alfredo Diez Nieto 25: Fofi Gennimata 24: Arnold Hano 24: James Michael Tyler 24: John Traynor 24: Erna de Vries 22: Jay Black 22: Peter Scolari 22: Udo Zimmermann 21: Yasin Abu Bakr 21: George Butler 21: Martha Henry 21: Halyna Hutchins edit section Ongoing conflicts Africa Angola Cabinda War Cameroon Anglophone Crisis Central African Republic Civil War Chad Insurgency in Northern Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Kivu conflict Allied Democratic Forces insurgency Ituri conflict Lord's Resistance Army insurgency Kamwina Nsapu rebellion Ethiopia Tigray War (spillover) Oromo conflict Ethiopia and Sudan Sudanese–Ethiopian clashes Ghana Western Togoland Rebellion Maghreb and Sahel regions Maghreb insurgency Mali Mali War Mozambique Insurgency in Cabo Delgado Nigeria Boko Haram insurgency (incl. Lake Chad region) Communal conflicts in Nigeria Senegal Casamance conflict Somalia Civil war South Sudan Ethnic violence in South Sudan Sudan War in Darfur South Kordofan conflict Sudanese nomadic conflicts (incl. South Sudan) Tunisia ISIL insurgency in Tunisia Western Sahara Western Sahara conflict 2020–2021 Western Saharan clashes Americas Colombia Colombian conflict Mexico Mexican drug war Peru Internal conflict in Peru Paraguay Insurgency in Paraguay Asia-Pacific Afghanistan Panjshir conflict Islamic State–Taliban conflict India Insurgency in Northeast India Assam separatist movements Insurgency in Manipur Ethnic conflict in Nagaland Khalistan movement Naxalite–Maoist insurgency India and Pakistan Kashmir conflict Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines Moro conflict Cross border attacks in Sabah Indonesia Papua conflict Myanmar Internal conflict in Myanmar Kachin conflict Karen conflict Rohingya conflict Pakistan Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Insurgency in Balochistan Philippines Communist rebellion Philippine drug war Thailand South Thailand insurgency Europe Armenia and Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Ukraine War in Donbas Russo-Ukrainian War Ireland and the UK Dissident Irish republican campaign Turkey Kurdish–Turkish conflict Global War on terror Middle East Egypt Sinai insurgency Iran and the Persian Gulf Iran–Israel proxy conflict Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict Sistan and Baluchestan insurgency Arab separatism in Khuzestan Kurdish separatism in Iran Iraq Iraqi conflict American-led intervention in Iraq Iranian intervention in Iraq Iraq and Syria (map) International military intervention against ISIL Israel and Gaza Israel and Syria Israeli-Syrian border conflict Israeli-Syrian ceasefire line incidents Syria American-led intervention in Syria Russian military intervention in the Syrian civil war Turkish occupation of northern Syria Yemen and Saudi Arabia Yemeni Civil War Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen Houthi–Saudi Arabian conflict Further information: List of ongoing armed conflicts edit section 2021 events and developments by topic Arts Architecture – Animation – Anime – Comics – Film (Horror, Science fiction) – Home video – Literature – Music (Classical, Country, Hip hop, Latin, Metal, Rock, UK, US) – Radio – Television (UK, US, Italy, Scotland) – Video games Politics and government Elections – International leaders – Sovereign states – Sovereign state leaders – Territorial governors Science and technology Archaeology – Biotechnology – Computing – Palaeontology – Quantum computing and communication – Senescence research – Sustainable energy research – Space/Astronomy – Spaceflight Environment and environmental sciences Birding/Ornithology – Climate change Transportation Aviation – Rail transport By place Afghanistan – Albania – Algeria – Andorra – Angola – Antarctica – Argentina – Armenia – Australia – Austria – Azerbaijan – Bangladesh – The Bahamas – Bahrain – Barbados – Belarus – Belgium – Benin – Bhutan – Bolivia – Bosnia and Herzegovina – Botswana – Brazil – Bulgaria – Burkina Faso – Burundi – Cambodia – Cameroon – Canada – Cape Verde – Central African Republic – Chad – Chile – China – Colombia – Costa Rica – Comoros – Croatia – Cuba – Cyprus – Czech Republic – Denmark – Ecuador – Egypt – El Salvador – Eritrea – Estonia – Ethiopia – European Union – Eswatini – Fiji – Finland – France – Gabon – Georgia – Germany – Ghana – Greece – Guatemala – Guinea – Guinea-Bissau – Guyana – Haiti – Honduras – Hong Kong – Hungary – Iceland – India – Indonesia – Iran – Iraq – Ireland – Israel – Italy – Ivory Coast – Japan – Jordan – Kazakhstan – Kenya – Kiribati – Kosovo – Kuwait – Kyrgyzstan – Laos – Latvia – Lebanon – Lesotho – Liberia – Libya – Lithuania – Luxembourg – Macau – Madagascar – Marshall Islands – Malawi – Malaysia – Mali – Malta – Mauritania – Mexico – Micronesia – Moldova – Mongolia – Montenegro – Morocco – Mozambique – Myanmar – Nauru – Namibia – Nepal – Netherlands – New Zealand – Nicaragua – Niger – Nigeria – North Korea – North Macedonia – Norway – Oman – Pakistan – Palau – Palestine – Panama – Papua New Guinea – Paraguay – Peru – Philippines – Poland – Portugal – Qatar – Romania – Russia – Rwanda – Samoa – Saudi Arabia – Senegal – Serbia – Seychelles – Singapore – Slovakia – Slovenia – Somalia – South Africa – Solomon Islands – South Korea – South Sudan – Spain – Sri Lanka – Sudan – Sweden – Switzerland – Syria – Taiwan – Tajikistan – Tanzania – Thailand – Togo – Tonga – Tunisia – Turkey – Turkmenistan – Tuvalu – Uganda – Ukraine – United Arab Emirates – United Kingdom – United States – Uruguay – Uzbekistan – Vanuatu – Venezuela – Vietnam – Yemen – Zambia – Zimbabwe Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments – Disestablishments Works and introductions categories Works – Introductions – Works entering the public domain Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2021. ...more edit section v t e Events by month 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2001 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2000 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1999 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1998 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1997 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1996 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1995 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1994 January February March April May June July August September October November December Portal:Current events Calendars Content listings Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured content Good articles Spoken articles Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Current_events&oldid=1054047874" Categories: All portals 2021 by day Current events portal 2021 Current events History portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages protected against vandalism Portals with triaged subpages from October 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Ænglisc ??????? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????? Banjar Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ??????? Bikol Central Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Dansk ?????? ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? IsiZulu Íslenska Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Li Niha Limburgs Magyar ?????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau ?????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Nederlands ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ????????? Piemontèis Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? ??? ?????????? ???? Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zeêuws ?? Dagbanli Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 19:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events Portal:Current events - Wikipedia Portal:Current events From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (October 2020) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events Edit instructions Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths Topics in the news SpaceX Crew-3 launch Kosmos 1408 is destroyed by a Russian anti-satellite weapon and becomes a cloud of space debris. We Continue the Change, led by Kiril Petkov and Asen Vasilev, wins the most seats in the Bulgarian general election. SpaceX's Crew-3 mission (launch pictured) takes four astronauts to the International Space Station. Former South African president F. W. de Klerk, who negotiated the end of apartheid with Nelson Mandela, dies at the age of 85. Ongoing: Belarus–European Union border crisis COVID-19 pandemic Recent deaths: W. Sterling Cary Edgardo Labella Sam Huff Dzifa Attivor Young Dolph Julio Lugo Nominate an article November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) (Sunday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks 2021 Jerusalem shooting A Hamas gunman opens fire in the alleyways of Jerusalem's Old City, killing an Israeli man and wounding four others, two of them seriously, Israeli officials said. (The Times of Israel) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Guadeloupe Social impact of the COVID-19 pandemic It is announced that France will deploy dozens of gendarmerie to Guadeloupe following the outbreak of rioting and looting on the archipelago over COVID-19 measures. At least 31 people were arrested overnight. Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin says "the first message is that the state will stand firm". (Al Jazeera) Politics and elections 2021 Chilean general election Chileans go to the polls to elect their new president, who will succeed outgoing Sebastián Piñera. (Reuters) November 20, 2021 (2021-11-20) (Saturday) edit history watch Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Hong Kong, COVID-19 vaccination in Hong Kong Hong Kong authorises the usage of the Sinovac CoronaVac vaccine for children between the ages of 3 and 17 years. (The Guardian) COVID-19 pandemic in Iraq, COVID-19 vaccination in Iraq Iraq receives 1.2 million doses of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine through the COVAX initiative. (AFP via Barron's) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, COVID-19 community quarantines in the Philippines The Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF) has fully implemented nationwide, the Alert Level System (ALS) formally replacing the previous community quarantine system that has been in place since March 2020. (Rappler) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgium begins to implement mandatory face masks in indoor places and outdoor events. The country also enforcing teleworking four days a week for all companies until December 12. (The Brussels Times) COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 22,936 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) Water crisis in Iran, 2016–2021 Iranian protests Thousands of people gather at the Khaju Bridge in Isfahan to protest the government's water and energy policies. (Al Jazeera) Law and crime Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Three people are seriously injured after being shot by police during protests against COVID-19 measures in Rotterdam, Netherlands. Fifty-one people are also arrested, half of whom are less than 18 years old. (Reuters) Politics and elections 2021 Malacca state election Barisan Nasional (BN) retains power, winning 21 out of 28 seats, defeating its rivals Pakatan Harapan (PH) and Perikatan Nasional (PN). (The Straits Times) November 19, 2021 (2021-11-19) (Friday) edit history watch Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The provincial government of British Columbia, Canada, declares a state of emergency in response to ongoing risks from floods and mudslides. Effective immediately until December 1, citizens in affected regions, including the Lower Mainland and Vancouver Island, are limited to 30 litres of diesel and gasoline purchased at fuel stations. Vehicles used for essential services, such as emergency response, commercial transport, and public transit, are exempt from this order and granted unlimited access to cardlock gas stations ordinarily used by the commercial trucking industry. Price gouging at retail gas stations and the resale of fuel is prohibited. Restrictions on non-essential travel along damaged highways are also set in place. (Global News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austrian chancellor Alexander Schallenberg announces a full nationwide lockdown for the entire population starting on 22 November, amid a surge in new COVID-19 cases that has overwhelmed hospitals. Schallenberg also announces that COVID-19 vaccinations will become mandatory as of 1 February 2022. (The Independent) Austria reports a record for the second consecutive day of 15,809 new cases of COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,027,274. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany The southern German state of Bavaria cancels all Christmas markets and imposes a lockdown in all districts that have a seven-day incidence rate of over 1,000 per 100,000 people amid a substantial increase in the number of new COVID-19 cases. However, schools and kindergartens will continue to remain open. (Deutsche Welle) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 11,289 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 998,488. (Budapest Business Journal) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the third consecutive day of 1,254 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 261,589. (Interfax) COVID-19 pandemic in North America COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada approves the usage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (Global News) COVID-19 pandemic in Grenada Argentina officially announces that it will donate 11,000 doses of the Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine to Grenada. (Memo) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, COVID-19 vaccination in the United States The U.S. CDC authorizes the booster dose of either Pfizer or Moderna COVID-19 vaccine for the general public, which means that all adults are eligible to receive their booster dose. (CNBC) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Victoria Restrictions are further eased for fully vaccinated Victorians as 90% of adults are now fully vaccinated. Mask wearing is still required in some indoor spaces and limits remain on daily visitor numbers to care facilities. Additionally, unvaccinated people continue to be banned from entering all non-essential businesses and also from employment in many industries. (The Guardian) International relations Palestine–United Kingdom relations The United Kingdom outlaws Hamas, the Palestinian militant group which serves as the ruling party of the Gaza Strip, and declares the party as a terrorist group. Previously, only the party's armed wing was outlawed. (Reuters) Law and crime Kenosha unrest shooting Kyle Rittenhouse, who shot three people during the Kenosha unrest in Wisconsin, United States, in August 2020, is found not guilty on all counts. (NPR) Hundreds of people march in Chicago, New York City and Portland to protest the verdict of the trial. (WCBS-TV) (WBBM-TV) (ABC News) Politics and elections Vice Presidency of Kamala Harris While Joe Biden undergoes medical treatment, Kamala Harris gains presidential power for a short period of time, making her the first female acting president of the United States. (Forbes) Iraqi Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr announces that he is dissolving the Promised Day Brigade, the armed faction loyal to him. Yesterday, al-Sadr said that non-governmental militias should hand in their weapons. (Reuters) November 18, 2021 (2021-11-18) (Thursday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) Arts and culture 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany COVID-19 vaccination in Germany The Standing Committee on Vaccination recommends that a booster dose of an mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine should be given to all adults over the age of 18 years. (Deutsche Welle) Germany reports a record for the second consecutive day of 65,371 new cases of COVID-19. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 15,145 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,011,465. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis announces that beginning on November 22, unvaccinated people will be banned from entering all indoor venues for which they could previously present a negative test result, due to an increase in new COVID-19 cases. Mitsotakis also announces that vaccine passports will expire after seven months for people over the age of 60 years and urges people in this age group to receive a booster dose. (Greek Reporter) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands The Netherlands reports a record for the fourth consecutive day of 23,860 new cases of COVID-19. (Dutch News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the second consecutive day of 1,251 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 260,335. (The Moscow Times) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Laos Laos reports a record 1,041 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 58,798. (Vietnam Plus) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 3,292 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 406,605. (The Korea Herald) A lab in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States, is placed on temporary lockdown by the CDC after several vials labeled "smallpox" are discovered in a freezer. (CBS News) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Belarus suspends electricity supplies to Ukraine, in "accordance with the established procedure for interaction within the framework of contractual relations", according to a statement from the Belarusian Ministry of Energy. (Ukranews) Law and crime At the Birmingham Crown Court in England, Zephaniah McLeod is sentenced to at least 21 years imprisonment for manslaughter and four counts of attempted murder after killing one person and wounding seven others during a 90-minute stabbing spree in September 2020. (BBC News) The New York Supreme Court vacates the convictions of Muhammad Abdul Aziz (formerly Norman 3X Butler) and the late Khalil Islam (formerly Thomas 15X Johnson) for the 1965 assassination of Malcolm X. The two men were convicted alongside Thomas Hagan (formerly Talmadge Hayer) in 1966. An investigation led by Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr. discovered that the FBI and the NYPD had withheld evidence that would have acquitted Aziz and Islam. (The New York Times) Politics and elections 2021 Tongan general election Tongans go to the polls to elect their new government. (RNZ) November 17, 2021 (2021-11-17) (Wednesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Sudanese coup d'état Soldiers open fire on civilians in Khartoum, Sudan, protesting against last month's coup d'état, killing 14 people and injuring dozens more. This brings the total death toll of civilians killed during the protests to 38. (Al Jazeera) Insurgency in the Maghreb The death toll from the attack at a military post in Inata, Soum Province, Burkina Faso, three days ago, increases to 53, including 49 gendarmes and four civilians. (Al Jazeera) 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis; Estonia–Russia barrier Estonia summons 1,700 reservists for a snap drill, which will include installing a 40-kilometer-long razor wire barrier along the border with Russia as the migrant crisis with Belarus intensifies. (Reuters) Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The Canadian government sends the Air Force to the Pacific coast to assist with supplies after torrential rains affected regions of British Columbia near Vancouver, causing damage to highways. Minister of Emergency Preparedness Bill Blair says that landslides and floods have blocked the town of Agassiz and residents are now being assisted by the military. (Al Jazeera) A Royal Air Force F-35 Lightning II jet crashes into the Mediterranean Sea during a routine operation. The pilot successfully ejects from the aircraft and has been rescued. (The Guardian) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom COVID-19 pandemic in Northern Ireland The Northern Ireland Executive votes to introduce a COVID-19 vaccine passport beginning next month, which will contain a person's vaccination status or negative COVID-19 test result, and will be used to enter bars, restaurants and pubs. (BBC News) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 14,416 new COVID-19 cases in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 996,320. (ORF) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany Germany reports a record 52,826 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record 1,247 deaths from COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 259,084. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Spain, COVID-19 vaccination in Spain Spain’s panel of vaccine experts approves the extension of the COVID-19 vaccine booster dose to people between the ages of 60 and 69 and healthcare workers. (The Washington Post) COVID-19 pandemic in Argentina COVID-19 vaccination in Argentina Argentina receives a shipment of 800,000 doses of the Sinopharm COVID-19 vaccine. (Ámbito) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines The Food and Drug Administration of the Philippines authorises emergency use of the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine, which will be included in the national vaccination program. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States COVID-19 vaccination in the United States White House COVID-19 Response Coordinator Jeff Zients announces that 80% of people aged 12 and older have received their first doses of the COVID-19 vaccine. (USA Today) (WNCN) Law and crime American rapper Young Dolph is shot and killed at a bakery in Memphis, Tennessee, by an unidentified gunman. (The Guardian) Politics and elections Former President of Georgia Mikheil Saakashvili, who has been on a hunger strike for 48 days, is in critical condition. Yesterday, Justice Minister Rati Bregadze denied Saakashvili transfer to a civilian clinic, from a prison hospital where he is being treated. (France 24) November 16, 2021 (2021-11-16) (Tuesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Insurgency in the Maghreb 2021 Niger attacks Gunmen raid the camp of a self-defence militia in the village of Bakorat, Niger, killing 25 people. (Reuters) 2021 Uganda bombings Three suicide bombers blow themselves up near a police station and the entrance of the Parliament in Kampala, killing three people and injuring 33 others. The Islamic State claims responsibility for the attacks. (Reuters) 2021 Armenia–Azerbaijan border crisis Fifteen Armenian soldiers are killed and twelve more are captured by the Azerbaijani Armed Forces during border clashes, amid mutual recriminations before a Russian-brokered ceasefire is agreed at 19:00 local time. (JAMnews) Business and economy Gas prices for the United Kingdom and the European Union increase by 17% after the German energy regulator suspends the approval of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline from Russia to Germany. The regulator says that the pipeline needs to comply with German law before they can certify the €10 billion project. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte orders the lifting of the mandate to use face shields in areas under Alert 3 and lower levels, which includes the National Capital Region. However, face shields will continue to be used in areas under Alert level 5 and areas under granular lockdown. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a new single-day record of 495 critical cases of COVID-19. (Yonhap News Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Russia, COVID-19 drug development Russia authorizes Pfizer to conduct clinical trials for its experimental COVID-19 drug named Paxlovid, which will continue until March 2023. (The Hill) COVID-19 pandemic in Ukraine Ukraine reports a record 838 deaths from COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 77,895. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in New Zealand New Zealand reports a record 222 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (New Zealand Herald) Deployment of COVID-19 vaccines The number of Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine doses supplied worldwide surpasses two billion. (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 drug development Pfizer and the Medicines Patent Pool sign a global licensing agreement that will allow Pfizer's experimental COVID-19 oral drug Paxlovid to be manufactured under a royalty-free license in 95 low and middle-income countries. (The Wall Street Journal) 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak Japan reports an outbreak of the H5N8 bird flu strain at a farm with about 11,000 egg-laying chickens in Izumi, Kagoshima Prefecture. (Reuters) A peer-reviewed study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine announces that an Argentinian woman has allegedly been "functionally cured" of HIV by her own immune system. If confirmed, the woman would be only the second individual in history whose own immune system successfully destroyed the disease without any form of stem-cell transplantation. (USA Today) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Migrants at a temporarily closed checkpoint in Ku?nica, Poland, throw stones at Polish border guards, while attempting to destroy the border fence in order to break through the Belarus–Poland border. The guards respond with water cannons and tear gas in an attempt to disperse the mob. The Polish ministry accuses the Belarusian military of aiding the attacks along Poland's borders. (BBC) Russo-Ukrainian War British Prime Minister Boris Johnson states that the west will have to choose between reliance on Russian gas and supporting Ukraine amid reported buildups of the Russian military near the border with Ukraine. (The Guardian) Belarus–European Union relations Researchers at the American cybersecurity firm Mandiant report that the Belarusian government has ties to the hacker group Ghostwriter, which was accused of targeting various German politicians and ministries in September and has since been accused of launching misinformation campaigns against Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Ukraine. (RFE/RL) Law and crime The Mexican Secretariat of National Defense announces that Rosalinda González Valencia, the wife of Jalisco New Generation Cartel leader Nemesio Oseguera "El Mencho" Cervantes, is re-arrested. González was previously detained in 2018 for allegedly running the finances of the cartel, but was released on bail. (BBC News) Politics and elections Politics of Monaco Princess Charlene of Monaco cancels all upcoming activities, including those of Monaco's national celebrations, due to ill health, according to a statement from the royal palace. The Princess is said to be suffering from "deep fatigue". (Reuters) Pandora Papers The impeachment against Chilean President Sebastián Piñera is defeated in the Senate, after the motion fails to meet the minimum two-thirds threshold in a vote. (Bloomberg) Science and technology Moons of Saturn A new moon of Saturn, S/2019 S 1, is announced, bringing the total number of known moons to 83. (Minor Planet Center) November 15, 2021 (2021-11-15) (Monday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Insurgency in the Maghreb The death toll from yesterday's mass shooting at a military post near a gold mine in Inata, Soum Province, Burkina Faso, increases to 32, including 28 gendarmes and four civilians, making the attack the deadliest against security forces in the country. (Reuters) Liverpool Women's Hospital bombing Yesterday's taxi explosion in Liverpool, England, that killed the bomber and injured the driver outside the Liverpool Women's Hospital, is declared a terrorist incident by police. Mayor Joanne Anderson says that the driver locked the bomber inside the vehicle after noticing that the bomber was wearing an explosive device. (BBC News) (WalesOnline) Three al-Shabaab members escape from a maximum security prison in Kenya, including one of the perpetrators of the 2015 Garissa attack, in which 148 people were killed. (Reuters) Business and economy Infrastructure policy of the Joe Biden administration U.S. President Joe Biden signs the $1.2 trillion Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act into law. (The Washington Post) Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods Merritt, British Columbia, Canada is evacuated after severe flooding inundated the city of about 7,000. Several highways throughout southern British Columbia were also washed out by heavy rain, leaving at least 10 people stranded. (CBC) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Cambodia, Travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic Cambodia begins to allow fully vaccinated foreign travellers to visit the country without a quarantine if they show a negative test result from the previous 72 hours and test negative again upon arrival, as the country currently has the one of world's highest COVID-19 vaccination rates. (AFP via Barron's) COVID-19 pandemic in India, Travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic India reopens its border to fully vaccinated foreign travellers on regular commercial flights after being closed for 18 months since March 2020 due to a decrease in the number of new COVID-19 cases. All travellers must follow COVID-19 protocols and show a negative test result from the previous 72 hours, except those from countries with mutual vaccine recognition. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in Sri Lanka, COVID-19 drug development Sri Lanka approves the use of the COVID-19 oral drug molnupiravir in the country. (Adaderana) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany Berlin begins to implement "2G" rule that limiting access to restaurants, cinemas, bars, and cultural and entertainment venues to those who are vaccinated or have recovered from COVID-19 amid a rising number of COVID-19 cases across Germany. (VOA) COVID-19 pandemic in Latvia Latvia ends its 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. curfew and allows companies to fire employees who are unvaccinated against COVID-19. Unvaccinated people are also banned from taking their duties for parliament and entering shopping malls with a size greater than 1,500 square metres (16,000 sq ft). (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom, COVID-19 vaccination in the United Kingdom The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation approves the extension of age eligibility of COVID-19 vaccine booster doses in the United Kingdom to people between 40 and 49 years old and the second dose for teenagers between the ages of 16 and 17 years. (The Guardian) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Queensland Queensland reopens its state border to fully vaccinated Australians travelling by plane, as 70% of the state's adult population are now fully vaccinated. (ABC News Australia) COVID-19 pandemic in Egypt Egypt begins to ban unvaccinated public sector employees and university students from entering workplaces and universities unless they show a negative PCR test from the previous 72 hours. (Arab News) International relations China–United States relations US President Joe Biden holds a virtual bilateral meeting with China's leader Xi Jinping. (AP News) Foreign relations of Kiribati The government of New Zealand vows to help islanders in Banaba, Kiribati, to access fresh water, as the island suffers from frequent droughts and is dependent on rainfall. (RNZ) 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis The European Union says it will impose new sanctions on Belarus in response to the migrant crisis on the Belarus–Poland border. (CNN) Politics and elections 2021 Argentine legislative election With nearly all votes counted, the ruling Peronist government loses control of both the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. This is the first time since the return to democracy in 1983 that Peronists do not have a majority in either house. (El Mostrador Chile) Science and technology Russia carries out a direct-ascent anti-satellite weapon test on the defunct Soviet spacecraft Kosmos 1408, creating a cloud of debris that threatens the International Space Station. (SpaceNews) More November 2021 events... Time: 19:54 UTC|Day: 21 November ?November 2021? S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 More November 2021 events...    About this page Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia Ongoing events Disasters Climate crisis COVID-19 pandemic 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak 2021 Atlantic hurricane season 2021 Pacific typhoon season Madagascar food crisis Water crisis in Iran Yemeni famine 2021 La Palma eruption Economic 2020–2021 global chip shortage 2021 global supply chain crisis COVID-19 recession Lebanese liquidity crisis Pandora Papers leak Turkish currency and debt crisis United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Politics Belarus?European Union border crisis Brazilian protests Colombian tax reform protests Eswatini protests Haitian protests Indian farmers' protests Insulate Britain protests Jersey dispute Libyan peace process Malaysian political crisis Myanmar protests Nicaraguan protests Nigerian protests Persian Gulf crisis Peruvian crisis Romanian political crisis Russian election protests Tigrayan peace process Thai protests Tunisian political crisis United States racial unrest Venezuelan presidential crisis edit section Elections and referendums Recent November 7: Nicaragua, President, National Assembly 14: Bulgaria, President (1st), National Assembly 14: Argentina, Chamber of Deputies, Senate 18: Tonga, Legislative Assembly Upcoming November 21: Bulgaria, President (2nd) 21: Chile, President, Senate, Chamber of Deputies 28: Honduras, President, National Congress 28: Kyrgyzstan, Supreme Council December 4: The Gambia, President edit section Trials Recently concluded Belarus: Maria Kalesnikava France: Nicolas Sarkozy Myanmar: Danny Fenster Rwanda: Paul Rusesabagina United States: Kyle Rittenhouse, Yanjun Xu, Lev Parnas, R. Kelly, Robert Durst Ongoing Armenia: Serzh Sargsyan Belarus: Sergei Tikhanovsky Canada: Raj Grewal France: Brussels ISIL Indonesia: Nurdin Abdullah Israel: Benjamin Netanyahu Italy: Matteo Salvini Kyrgyzstan: Almazbek Atambayev Malta: Yorgen Fenech Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi Nigeria: Nnamdi Kanu Philippines: Leila de Lima Sudan: Omar al-Bashir United States: Elizabeth Holmes, Death of Ahmaud Arbery Upcoming Indonesia: Azis Syamsuddin, Alex Noerdin Kosovo: Hashim Thaçi, Kadri Veseli Lesotho: Maesiah Thabane United States: Allen Weisselberg, Ghislaine Maxwell, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Jussie Smollett Vatican City: Giovanni Angelo Becciu ICC: Ali Kushayb edit section Sport Association football 2021–22 UEFA Europa League 2021–22 UEFA Champions league 2021–22 Premier League 2021–22 Bundesliga 2021–22 Serie A 2021–22 La Liga 2021 Copa Libertadores final stages 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification 2020–21 UEFA Nations League 2021 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A 2021 MLS Cup Playoffs Women's association football 2021 NWSL season American football 2021 NCAA Division I FBS football season 2021 NCAA Division I FCS football season 2021 NFL season Baseball 2021 NPB season Basketball 2021–22 NBA season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Women's Basketball Season Cricket 2021–23 ICC World Test Championship 2020–23 ICC Cricket World Cup Super League 2019–23 ICC Cricket World Cup League 2 2019–22 ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League  Canadian football 2021 CFL season Golf 2021 European Tour 2021 LPGA Tour 2020 PGA Tour Champions 2021 Ladies European Tour 2021–22 PGA Tour Ice hockey 2021–22 NHL season 2021–22 IIHF Continental Cup Motorsport 2021 Formula One Championship 2021 Rally Championship 2021 MotoGP 2021 Supercars Championship Rugby union 2021–22 Premiership Rugby 2021–22 United Rugby Championship 2021–22 Top 14 2021 Bunnings NPC 2021 Super Rugby season Tennis 2021 ATP Tour 2021 WTA Tour 2020–21 Davis Cup (Finals) Other sports seasons 2021–22 International cricket season 2021–22 snooker season 2021–22 curling season More details – current sports events edit section Recent deaths November 18: Peter Buck 18: Mick Rock 18: Ardeshir Zahedi 17: Dave Frishberg 17: Art LaFleur 17: Young Dolph 16: Ri Yong-suk 15: Clarissa Eden 15: Daulet Sembaev 14: Etel Adnan 13: Sam Huff 13: Wilbur Smith 12: Matthew Festing 11: F. W. de Klerk 11: Glen de Vries 11: Graeme Edge 11: Winter 10: Jun Hong Lu 9: Max Cleland 9: Austin Currie 8: Pedro Feliciano 8: Seán FitzPatrick 8: Mahlagha Mallah 8: Abdul Wahab Dalimunthe 7: Dean Stockwell 6: Angelo Mosca 6: Shawn Rhoden 6: Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé 6: Muamer Zukorli? 6: Yukhym Zvyahilsky 5: Marília Mendonça 4: Ruth Ann Minner 4: Lionel Blair 3: Georgie Dann 2: Sabah Fakhri 1: Aaron Beck October 31: Catherine Tizard 30: Jerry Remy 30: Alan Davidson 30: Bert Newton 29: Clément Mouamba 29: Iran Darroudi 29: Ashley Mallett 29: José Antonio González 27: Michael Laughlin 26: Mort Sahl 26: Walter Smith 26: Roh Tae-woo 25: Alfredo Diez Nieto 25: Fofi Gennimata 24: Arnold Hano 24: James Michael Tyler 24: John Traynor 24: Erna de Vries 22: Jay Black 22: Peter Scolari 22: Udo Zimmermann edit section Ongoing conflicts Africa Angola Cabinda War Cameroon Anglophone Crisis Central African Republic Civil War Chad Insurgency in Northern Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Kivu conflict Allied Democratic Forces insurgency Ituri conflict Lord's Resistance Army insurgency Kamwina Nsapu rebellion Ethiopia Tigray War (spillover) Oromo conflict Ethiopia and Sudan Sudanese–Ethiopian clashes Ghana Western Togoland Rebellion Maghreb and Sahel regions Maghreb insurgency Mali Mali War Mozambique Insurgency in Cabo Delgado Nigeria Boko Haram insurgency (incl. Lake Chad region) Communal conflicts in Nigeria Senegal Casamance conflict Somalia Civil war South Sudan Ethnic violence in South Sudan Sudan War in Darfur South Kordofan conflict Sudanese nomadic conflicts (incl. South Sudan) Tunisia ISIL insurgency in Tunisia Western Sahara Western Sahara conflict 2020–2021 Western Saharan clashes Americas Colombia Colombian conflict Mexico Mexican drug war Peru Internal conflict in Peru Paraguay Insurgency in Paraguay Asia-Pacific Afghanistan Panjshir conflict Islamic State–Taliban conflict India Insurgency in Northeast India Assam separatist movements Insurgency in Manipur Ethnic conflict in Nagaland Khalistan movement Naxalite–Maoist insurgency India and Pakistan Kashmir conflict Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines Moro conflict Cross border attacks in Sabah Indonesia Papua conflict Myanmar Internal conflict in Myanmar Kachin conflict Karen conflict Rohingya conflict Pakistan Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Insurgency in Balochistan Philippines Communist rebellion Philippine drug war Thailand South Thailand insurgency Europe Armenia and Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Ukraine War in Donbas Russo-Ukrainian War Ireland and the UK Dissident Irish republican campaign Turkey Kurdish–Turkish conflict Global War on terror Middle East Egypt Sinai insurgency Iran and the Persian Gulf Iran–Israel proxy conflict Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict Sistan and Baluchestan insurgency Arab separatism in Khuzestan Kurdish separatism in Iran Iraq Iraqi conflict American-led intervention in Iraq Iranian intervention in Iraq Iraq and Syria (map) International military intervention against ISIL Israel and Gaza Israel and Syria Israeli-Syrian border conflict Israeli-Syrian ceasefire line incidents Syria American-led intervention in Syria Russian military intervention in the Syrian civil war Turkish occupation of northern Syria Yemen and Saudi Arabia Yemeni Civil War Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen Houthi–Saudi Arabian conflict Further information: List of ongoing armed conflicts edit section 2021 events and developments by topic Arts Architecture – Animation – Anime – Comics – Film (Horror, Science fiction) – Home video – Literature – Music (Classical, Country, Hip hop, Latin, Metal, Rock, UK, US) – Radio – Television (UK, US, Italy, Scotland) – Video games Politics and government Elections – International leaders – Sovereign states – Sovereign state leaders – Territorial governors Science and technology Archaeology – Biotechnology – Computing – Palaeontology – Quantum computing and communication – Senescence research – Sustainable energy research – Space/Astronomy – Spaceflight Environment and environmental sciences Birding/Ornithology – Climate change Transportation Aviation – Rail transport By place Afghanistan – Albania – Algeria – Andorra – Angola – Antarctica – Argentina – Armenia – Australia – Austria – Azerbaijan – Bangladesh – The Bahamas – Bahrain – Barbados – Belarus – Belgium – Benin – Bhutan – Bolivia – Bosnia and Herzegovina – Botswana – Brazil – Bulgaria – Burkina Faso – Burundi – Cambodia – Cameroon – Canada – Cape Verde – Central African Republic – Chad – Chile – China – Colombia – Costa Rica – Comoros – Croatia – Cuba – Cyprus – Czech Republic – Denmark – Ecuador – Egypt – El Salvador – Eritrea – Estonia – Ethiopia – European Union – Eswatini – Fiji – Finland – France – Gabon – Georgia – Germany – Ghana – Greece – Guatemala – Guinea – Guinea-Bissau – Guyana – Haiti – Honduras – Hong Kong – Hungary – Iceland – India – Indonesia – Iran – Iraq – Ireland – Israel – Italy – Ivory Coast – Japan – Jordan – Kazakhstan – Kenya – Kiribati – Kosovo – Kuwait – Kyrgyzstan – Laos – Latvia – Lebanon – Lesotho – Liberia – Libya – Lithuania – Luxembourg – Macau – Madagascar – Marshall Islands – Malawi – Malaysia – Mali – Malta – Mauritania – Mexico – Micronesia – Moldova – Mongolia – Montenegro – Morocco – Mozambique – Myanmar – Nauru – Namibia – Nepal – Netherlands – New Zealand – Nicaragua – Niger – Nigeria – North Korea – North Macedonia – Norway – Oman – Pakistan – Palau – Palestine – Panama – Papua New Guinea – Paraguay – Peru – Philippines – Poland – Portugal – Qatar – Romania – Russia – Rwanda – Samoa – Saudi Arabia – Senegal – Serbia – Seychelles – Singapore – Slovakia – Slovenia – Somalia – South Africa – Solomon Islands – South Korea – South Sudan – Spain – Sri Lanka – Sudan – Sweden – Switzerland – Syria – Taiwan – Tajikistan – Tanzania – Thailand – Togo – Tonga – Tunisia – Turkey – Turkmenistan – Tuvalu – Uganda – Ukraine – United Arab Emirates – United Kingdom – United States – Uruguay – Uzbekistan – Vanuatu – Venezuela – Vietnam – Yemen – Zambia – Zimbabwe Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments – Disestablishments Works and introductions categories Works – Introductions – Works entering the public domain Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2021. ...more edit section v t e Events by month 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2001 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2000 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1999 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1998 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1997 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1996 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1995 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1994 January February March April May June July August September October November December Portal:Current events Calendars Content listings Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured content Good articles Spoken articles Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Current_events&oldid=1054047874" Categories: All portals 2021 by day Current events portal 2021 Current events History portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages protected against vandalism Portals with triaged subpages from October 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Ænglisc ??????? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????? Banjar Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ??????? Bikol Central Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Dansk ?????? ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? IsiZulu Íslenska Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Li Niha Limburgs Magyar ?????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau ?????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Nederlands ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ????????? Piemontèis Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? ??? ?????????? ???? Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zeêuws ?? Dagbanli Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 19:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events Portal:Current events - Wikipedia Portal:Current events From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (October 2020) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events Edit instructions Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths Topics in the news Abdalla Hamdok At least 46 people are killed in a bus crash near Bosnek, Bulgaria. Abdalla Hamdok (pictured) is reinstated as Prime Minister of Sudan in an agreement following the October coup. In rallying, Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia win the World Championship, and Toyota takes the manufacturers' title. Kosmos 1408 is destroyed by a Russian anti-satellite weapon and becomes a cloud of space debris. Ongoing: Belarus–European Union border crisis COVID-19 pandemic Recent deaths: Douglas Reid Jones Cedric Robinson David Longdon Jay Last W. Sterling Cary Edgardo Labella Nominate an article November 23, 2021 (2021-11-23) (Tuesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks War in Donbas, Russo-Ukrainian War Ukraine warns of "combat preparedness" of separatist forces in eastern Ukraine as the Russian military presence on the border builds up, warning of a potential new conflict. The separatists began mobilization of reservists yesterday. (Reuters) Arts and culture Artefacts from the Battle of Magdala are returned to Ethiopia by the United Kingdom. (WION) Business and economy 2018–2021 Turkish currency and debt crisis The Turkish lira crashes to an all-time low of 13.44 to the U.S. dollar. The crash was sparked by President Recep Tayyip Erdo?an's defence of the Central Bank's continued interest rate cuts amid soaring inflation. (CNBC) Disasters and accidents 2021 Bulgaria bus crash At least 46 people are killed when a bus carrying North Macedonian tourists returning from Istanbul crashes and catches fire near Bosnek, Bulgaria. (The New York Times) Two people are killed and 16 are injured during an explosion at an EDePro rocket engine plant near Belgrade, Serbia. (Reuters) Six people are dead and ten others are missing after the ferry they were travelling on capsizes in Kinniya, Sri Lanka. (Reuters) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Switzerland COVID-19 vaccination in Switzerland Swissmedic approves the extension of booster dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine to people aged above 16 years as well as high-risk people aged above 12. (The Times of India) COVID-19 drug development The Swiss government signs a deal to reserve 8,640 doses of the Merck & Co. antiviral drug molnupiravir, with the said drug should be avaliable at least January 2022. (Yahoo! Finance) November 22, 2021 (2021-11-22) (Monday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Tigray War; Oromo conflict TDF–OLA joint offensive Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed, a former soldier, announces that he will lead his country's army from the battlefront beginning tomorrow. (The Washington Post) Business and economy 2021 United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Bulb Energy, which supplies 1.7 million customers in the United Kingdom, collapses into administration, becoming the largest energy supplier to have ever collapsed. The company will also be the first energy supplier to be placed under "special administration", which means that the company will be run by the government regulator Ofgem. (The Guardian) Disasters and accidents Nine people die in a fire in a nursing home in the village of Royak, Dalgopol Municipality, Bulgaria. (BNT) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria enters its fourth full nationwide lockdown that prohibits people from leaving their home except for specific reasons, while allowing schools to remain open, in order to reduce the number of new COVID-19 cases. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in France Prime Minister Jean Castex tests positive for COVID-19. (Reuters) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greece begins to implement measures that ban people who are unvaccinated or who have not recovered from COVID-19 from entering indoor public places and also mandates the wearing of masks in all workplaces in order to reduce the spread of COVID-19. (Ekathimerini) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovakia Slovakia imposes a lockdown for those who are unvaccinated against COVID-19, which prevents them from entering non-essential shops. Slovakia is currently experiencing one of the world's highest infection rates. (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Israel, COVID-19 vaccination in Israel Israel begins administering the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (The Times of Israel) COVID-19 pandemic in Singapore Singapore partially eases its social gathering restrictions and will allow up to five vaccinated people to dine in at food and drink establishments, hawker centres, and coffee shops as the country moves to the endemic phase due to a decrease in the number of new COVID-19 cases. (Singapore Business Report) COVID-19 pandemic in Kenya The Kenyan government approves a measure requiring people to present proof of vaccination in order to enter businesses, restaurants and government offices. This is also to encourage vaccination in a country where only 5% of the population is vaccinated. (The New York Times) International relations Bulgaria–United States relations The United States expresses a "deep concern" over Bulgarian President Rumen Radev's remarks, where he referred to Crimea as "Russian". Radev has expressed his views of maintaining "pragmatic ties" with Russia. The statement by the United States comes after Ukraine summoned the Bulgarian ambassador to Kyiv three days ago. (RFE/RL) Politics and elections Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) (Sunday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks 2021 Jerusalem shooting A Hamas gunman opens fire in the alleyways of Jerusalem's Old City, killing an Israeli man and wounding three others, before being shot and killed by Israeli forces. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Russia, COVID-19 vaccination in Russia President Vladimir Putin receives his booster dose of the Sputnik Light COVID-19 vaccine. (The Hill) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovenia Slovenia surpasses 400,000 cases of COVID-19. (UrduPoint) COVID-19 pandemic in Guadeloupe, Social impact of the COVID-19 pandemic It is announced that France will deploy dozens of gendarmerie to Guadeloupe following occurrences of rioting and looting in the archipelago over COVID-19 measures. At least 31 people were arrested overnight. Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin says that "the first message is that the state will stand firm". (Al Jazeera) COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia Malaysia surpasses 30,000 deaths from COVID-19. (Malay Mail) Law and crime 2021 Waukesha Christmas parade car rampage At least five people are killed and over 40 injured by a hit and run driver who drove through an early Christmas parade in Waukesha, Wisconsin, United States. A person of interest is in custody. (ABC News) Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgian police fire tear gas and water cannons after violence broke out at the end of a mass demonstration in Brussels that involved 35,000 people against tougher COVID-19-related measures. (The Independent) The Taliban issues new guidelines for television broadcasts, mandating that female presenters and journalists wear Islamic coverings, banning entertainment considered blasphemous or insulting to Afghans, and prohibiting films that promote foreign cultural values, among others. (BBC News) Politics and elections 2021 Chilean general election Chileans go to the polls to elect their new president, who will succeed outgoing president Sebastián Piñera. (Reuters) Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) Aftermath of the October 2021 Sudanese coup d'état Abdalla Hamdok is reinstated as Prime Minister of Sudan following a political agreement with Abdel Fattah al-Burhan. (BBC News) Sports 2021 World Rally Championship Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia win the 2021 Championship, while Toyota secure the manufacturers' title. November 20, 2021 (2021-11-20) (Saturday) edit history watch Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Hong Kong Hong Kong authorises the usage of the Sinovac CoronaVac vaccine for children between the ages of 3 and 17 years. (The Guardian) COVID-19 pandemic in Iraq Iraq receives 1.2 million doses of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine through the COVAX initiative. (AFP via Barron's) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, COVID-19 community quarantines in the Philippines The Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF) has fully implemented nationwide, the Alert Level System (ALS) formally replacing the previous community quarantine system that had been in place since March 2020. (Rappler) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgium begins to implement mandatory face masks in indoor places and outdoor events. The country is also enforcing teleworking four days a week for all companies until 12 December. (The Brussels Times) COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 22,936 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) Water crisis in Iran, 2016–2021 Iranian protests Thousands of people gather at the Khaju Bridge in Isfahan to protest the government's water and energy policies. (Al Jazeera) Law and crime Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Three people are seriously injured after being shot by police during protests against COVID-19 measures in Rotterdam, Netherlands. Fifty-one people are also arrested, half of whom are less than 18 years old. (Reuters) Politics and elections 2021 Malacca state election Barisan Nasional (BN) retains power, winning 21 out of 28 seats, defeating its rivals Pakatan Harapan (PH) and Perikatan Nasional (PN). (The Straits Times) November 19, 2021 (2021-11-19) (Friday) edit history watch Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The provincial government of British Columbia, Canada, declares a state of emergency in response to ongoing risks from floods and mudslides. Effective immediately until December 1, citizens in affected regions, including the Lower Mainland and Vancouver Island, are limited to 30 litres of diesel and gasoline purchased at fuel stations. Vehicles used for essential services, such as emergency response, commercial transport, and public transit, are exempt from this order and granted unlimited access to cardlock gas stations ordinarily used by the commercial trucking industry. Price gouging at retail gas stations and the resale of fuel is prohibited. Restrictions on non-essential travel along damaged highways are also set in place. (Global News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austrian chancellor Alexander Schallenberg announces a full nationwide lockdown for the entire population starting on 22 November, amid a surge in new COVID-19 cases that has overwhelmed hospitals. Schallenberg also announces that COVID-19 vaccinations will become mandatory as of 1 February 2022. (The Independent) Austria reports a record for the second consecutive day of 15,809 new cases of COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,027,274. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany The southern German state of Bavaria cancels all Christmas markets and imposes a lockdown in all districts that have a seven-day incidence rate of over 1,000 per 100,000 people amid a substantial increase in the number of new COVID-19 cases. However, schools and kindergartens will continue to remain open. (Deutsche Welle) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 11,289 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 998,488. (Budapest Business Journal) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the third consecutive day of 1,254 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 261,589. (Interfax) COVID-19 pandemic in North America COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada approves the usage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (Global News) COVID-19 pandemic in Grenada Argentina officially announces that it will donate 11,000 doses of the Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine to Grenada. (Memo) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, COVID-19 vaccination in the United States The U.S. CDC authorizes the booster dose of either Pfizer or Moderna COVID-19 vaccine for the general public, which means that all adults are eligible to receive their booster dose. (CNBC) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Victoria Restrictions are further eased for fully vaccinated Victorians as 90% of adults are now fully vaccinated. Mask wearing is still required in some indoor spaces and limits remain on daily visitor numbers to care facilities. Additionally, unvaccinated people continue to be banned from entering all non-essential businesses and also from employment in many industries. (The Guardian) International relations Palestine–United Kingdom relations, Israel-United Kingdom relations The United Kingdom outlaws Hamas, the Palestinian militant group which serves as the ruling party of the Gaza Strip, and declares the party as a terrorist group. Previously, only the party's armed wing was outlawed. (Reuters) Law and crime Kenosha unrest shooting Kyle Rittenhouse, who shot three people during the unrest in Kenosha, Wisconsin, United States, in August 2020, is found not guilty on all counts. (NPR) Hundreds of people march in Chicago, New York City and Portland to protest the verdict of the trial. (WCBS-TV) (WBBM-TV) (ABC News) Politics and elections Vice Presidency of Kamala Harris While U.S. President Joe Biden undergoes medical treatment, U.S. Vice President Kamala Harris is transfered presidential power for a short period of time, making her the first female acting president of the United States. (Forbes) Iraqi Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr announces that he is dissolving the Promised Day Brigade, the armed faction loyal to him. Yesterday, al-Sadr said that non-governmental militias should hand in their weapons. (Reuters) November 18, 2021 (2021-11-18) (Thursday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) Arts and culture 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany COVID-19 vaccination in Germany The Standing Committee on Vaccination recommends that a booster dose of an mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine should be given to all adults over the age of 18 years. (Deutsche Welle) Germany reports a record for the second consecutive day of 65,371 new cases of COVID-19. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 15,145 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,011,465. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis announces that beginning on November 22, unvaccinated people will be banned from entering all indoor venues for which they could previously present a negative test result, due to an increase in new COVID-19 cases. Mitsotakis also announces that vaccine passports will expire after seven months for people over the age of 60 years and urges people in this age group to receive a booster dose. (Greek Reporter) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands The Netherlands reports a record for the fourth consecutive day of 23,860 new cases of COVID-19. (Dutch News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the second consecutive day of 1,251 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 260,335. (The Moscow Times) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Laos Laos reports a record 1,041 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 58,798. (Vietnam Plus) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 3,292 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 406,605. (The Korea Herald) A lab in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States, is placed on temporary lockdown by the CDC after several vials labeled "smallpox" are discovered in a freezer. (CBS News) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Belarus suspends electricity supplies to Ukraine, in "accordance with the established procedure for interaction within the framework of contractual relations", according to a statement from the Belarusian Ministry of Energy. (Ukranews) Law and crime At the Birmingham Crown Court in England, Zephaniah McLeod is sentenced to at least 21 years imprisonment for manslaughter and four counts of attempted murder after killing one person and wounding seven others during a 90-minute stabbing spree in September 2020. (BBC News) The New York Supreme Court vacates the convictions of Muhammad Abdul Aziz (formerly Norman 3X Butler) and the late Khalil Islam (formerly Thomas 15X Johnson) for the 1965 assassination of Malcolm X. The two men were convicted alongside Thomas Hagan (formerly Talmadge Hayer) in 1966. An investigation led by Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr. discovered that the FBI and the NYPD had withheld evidence that would have acquitted Aziz and Islam. (The New York Times) Politics and elections 2021 Tongan general election Tongans go to the polls to elect their new government. (RNZ) November 17, 2021 (2021-11-17) (Wednesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Sudanese coup d'état Soldiers open fire on civilians in Khartoum, Sudan, protesting against last month's coup d'état, killing 14 people and injuring dozens more. This brings the total death toll of civilians killed during the protests to 38. (Al Jazeera) Insurgency in the Maghreb The death toll from the attack at a military post in Inata, Soum Province, Burkina Faso, three days ago, increases to 53, including 49 gendarmes and four civilians. (Al Jazeera) 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis; Estonia–Russia barrier Estonia summons 1,700 reservists for a snap drill, which will include installing a 40-kilometer-long razor wire barrier along the border with Russia as the migrant crisis with Belarus intensifies. (Reuters) Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The Canadian government sends the Air Force to the Pacific coast to assist with supplies after torrential rains affected regions of British Columbia near Vancouver, causing damage to highways. Minister of Emergency Preparedness Bill Blair says that landslides and floods have blocked the town of Agassiz and residents are now being assisted by the military. (Al Jazeera) A Royal Air Force F-35 Lightning II jet crashes into the Mediterranean Sea during a routine operation. The pilot successfully ejects from the aircraft and has been rescued. (The Guardian) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom COVID-19 pandemic in Northern Ireland The Northern Ireland Executive votes to introduce a COVID-19 vaccine passport beginning next month, which will contain a person's vaccination status or negative COVID-19 test result, and will be used to enter bars, restaurants and pubs. (BBC News) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 14,416 new COVID-19 cases in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 996,320. (ORF) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany Germany reports a record 52,826 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record 1,247 deaths from COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 259,084. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Spain, COVID-19 vaccination in Spain Spain’s panel of vaccine experts approves the extension of the COVID-19 vaccine booster dose to people between the ages of 60 and 69 and healthcare workers. (The Washington Post) COVID-19 pandemic in Argentina COVID-19 vaccination in Argentina Argentina receives a shipment of 800,000 doses of the Sinopharm COVID-19 vaccine. (Ámbito) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines The Food and Drug Administration of the Philippines authorises emergency use of the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine, which will be included in the national vaccination program. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States COVID-19 vaccination in the United States White House COVID-19 Response Coordinator Jeff Zients announces that 80% of people aged 12 and older have received their first doses of the COVID-19 vaccine. (USA Today) (WNCN) Law and crime American rapper Young Dolph is shot and killed at a bakery in Memphis, Tennessee, by an unidentified gunman. (The Guardian) Politics and elections Former President of Georgia Mikheil Saakashvili, who has been on a hunger strike for 48 days, is in critical condition. Yesterday, Justice Minister Rati Bregadze denied Saakashvili transfer to a civilian clinic, from a prison hospital where he is being treated. (France 24) More November 2021 events... Time: 19:25 UTC|Day: 23 November ?November 2021? S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 More November 2021 events...    About this page Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia Ongoing events Disasters Climate crisis COVID-19 pandemic 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak 2021 Atlantic hurricane season 2021 Pacific typhoon season Madagascar food crisis Water crisis in Iran Yemeni famine 2021 La Palma eruption Economic 2020–2021 global chip shortage 2021 global supply chain crisis COVID-19 recession Lebanese liquidity crisis Pandora Papers leak Sri Lankan economic and food crisis Turkish currency and debt crisis United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Politics Belarus?European Union border crisis Brazilian protests Colombian tax reform protests Eswatini protests Haitian protests Indian farmers' protests Insulate Britain protests Jersey dispute Libyan peace process Malaysian political crisis Myanmar protests Nicaraguan protests Nigerian protests Persian Gulf crisis Peruvian crisis Romanian political crisis Russian election protests Tigrayan peace process Thai protests Tunisian political crisis United States racial unrest Venezuelan presidential crisis edit section Elections and referendums Recent November 7: Nicaragua, President, National Assembly 14: Bulgaria, President (1st), National Assembly 14: Argentina, Chamber of Deputies, Senate 18: Tonga, Legislative Assembly 21: Bulgaria, President (2nd) 21: Chile, President (1st), Senate, Chamber of Deputies Upcoming November 28: Honduras, President, National Congress 28: Kyrgyzstan, Supreme Council December 4: The Gambia, President edit section Trials Recently concluded Belarus: Maria Kalesnikava France: Nicolas Sarkozy Myanmar: Danny Fenster Rwanda: Paul Rusesabagina United States: Kyle Rittenhouse, Yanjun Xu, Lev Parnas, R. Kelly, Robert Durst Ongoing Armenia: Serzh Sargsyan Belarus: Sergei Tikhanovsky Canada: Raj Grewal France: Brussels ISIL Indonesia: Nurdin Abdullah Israel: Benjamin Netanyahu Italy: Matteo Salvini Kyrgyzstan: Almazbek Atambayev Malta: Yorgen Fenech Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi Philippines: Leila de Lima Sudan: Omar al-Bashir United States: Elizabeth Holmes, Death of Ahmaud Arbery Upcoming Indonesia: Azis Syamsuddin, Alex Noerdin Kosovo: Hashim Thaçi, Kadri Veseli Nigeria: Nnamdi Kanu United States: Allen Weisselberg, Ghislaine Maxwell, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Jussie Smollett Vatican City: Giovanni Angelo Becciu ICC: Ali Kushayb edit section Sport Association football 2021–22 UEFA Europa League 2021–22 UEFA Champions league 2021–22 Premier League 2021–22 Bundesliga 2021–22 Serie A 2021–22 La Liga 2021 Copa Libertadores final stages 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification 2020–21 UEFA Nations League 2021 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A 2021 MLS Cup Playoffs Women's association football 2021 NWSL season American football 2021 NCAA Division I FBS football season 2021 NCAA Division I FCS football season 2021 NFL season Baseball 2021 NPB season Basketball 2021–22 NBA season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Women's Basketball Season Cricket 2021–23 ICC World Test Championship 2020–23 ICC Cricket World Cup Super League 2019–23 ICC Cricket World Cup League 2 2019–22 ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League  Canadian football 2021 CFL season Golf 2021 European Tour 2021 LPGA Tour 2020 PGA Tour Champions 2021 Ladies European Tour 2021–22 PGA Tour Ice hockey 2021–22 NHL season 2021–22 IIHF Continental Cup Motorsport 2021 Formula One Championship 2021 Rally Championship 2021 MotoGP 2021 Supercars Championship Rugby union 2021–22 Premiership Rugby 2021–22 United Rugby Championship 2021–22 Top 14 2021 Bunnings NPC 2021 Super Rugby season Tennis 2021 ATP Tour 2021 WTA Tour 2020–21 Davis Cup (Finals) Other sports seasons 2021–22 International cricket season 2021–22 snooker season 2021–22 curling season More details – current sports events edit section Recent deaths November 23: Chun Doo-hwan 18: Peter Buck 18: Mick Rock 18: Ardeshir Zahedi 17: Dave Frishberg 17: Art LaFleur 17: Young Dolph 16: Ri Yong-suk 15: Clarissa Eden 15: Daulet Sembaev 14: Etel Adnan 14: W. Sterling Cary 13: Sam Huff 13: Wilbur Smith 12: Matthew Festing 11: F. W. de Klerk 11: Glen de Vries 11: Graeme Edge 11: Winter 10: Jun Hong Lu 9: Max Cleland 9: Austin Currie 8: Pedro Feliciano 8: Seán FitzPatrick 8: Mahlagha Mallah 8: Abdul Wahab Dalimunthe 7: Dean Stockwell 6: Angelo Mosca 6: Shawn Rhoden 6: Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé 6: Muamer Zukorli? 6: Yukhym Zvyahilsky 5: Marília Mendonça 4: Ruth Ann Minner 4: Lionel Blair 3: Georgie Dann 2: Sabah Fakhri 1: Aaron Beck October 31: Catherine Tizard 30: Jerry Remy 30: Alan Davidson 30: Bert Newton 29: Clément Mouamba 29: Iran Darroudi 29: Ashley Mallett 29: José Antonio González 27: Michael Laughlin 26: Mort Sahl 26: Walter Smith 26: Roh Tae-woo 25: Alfredo Diez Nieto 25: Fofi Gennimata 24: Arnold Hano 24: James Michael Tyler 24: John Traynor 24: Erna de Vries edit section Ongoing conflicts Africa Angola Cabinda War Cameroon Anglophone Crisis Central African Republic Civil War Chad Insurgency in Northern Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Kivu conflict Allied Democratic Forces insurgency Ituri conflict Lord's Resistance Army insurgency Kamwina Nsapu rebellion Ethiopia Tigray War (spillover) Oromo conflict Ethiopia and Sudan Sudanese–Ethiopian clashes Ghana Western Togoland Rebellion Maghreb and Sahel regions Maghreb insurgency Mali Mali War Mozambique Insurgency in Cabo Delgado Nigeria Boko Haram insurgency (incl. Lake Chad region) Communal conflicts in Nigeria Senegal Casamance conflict Somalia Civil war South Sudan Ethnic violence in South Sudan Sudan War in Darfur South Kordofan conflict Sudanese nomadic conflicts (incl. South Sudan) Tunisia ISIL insurgency in Tunisia Western Sahara Western Sahara conflict 2020–2021 Western Saharan clashes Americas Colombia Colombian conflict Mexico Mexican drug war Peru Internal conflict in Peru Paraguay Insurgency in Paraguay Asia-Pacific Afghanistan Panjshir conflict Islamic State–Taliban conflict India Insurgency in Northeast India Assam separatist movements Insurgency in Manipur Ethnic conflict in Nagaland Khalistan movement Naxalite–Maoist insurgency India and Pakistan Kashmir conflict Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines Moro conflict Cross border attacks in Sabah Indonesia Papua conflict Myanmar Internal conflict in Myanmar Kachin conflict Karen conflict Rohingya conflict Pakistan Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Insurgency in Balochistan Philippines Communist rebellion Philippine drug war Thailand South Thailand insurgency Europe Armenia and Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Ukraine War in Donbas Russo-Ukrainian War Ireland and the UK Dissident Irish republican campaign Turkey Kurdish–Turkish conflict Global War on terror Middle East Egypt Sinai insurgency Iran and the Persian Gulf Iran–Israel proxy conflict Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict Sistan and Baluchestan insurgency Arab separatism in Khuzestan Kurdish separatism in Iran Iraq Iraqi conflict American-led intervention in Iraq Iranian intervention in Iraq Iraq and Syria (map) International military intervention against ISIL Israel and Gaza Israel and Syria Israeli-Syrian border conflict Israeli-Syrian ceasefire line incidents Syria American-led intervention in Syria Russian military intervention in the Syrian civil war Turkish occupation of northern Syria Yemen and Saudi Arabia Yemeni Civil War Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen Houthi–Saudi Arabian conflict Further information: List of ongoing armed conflicts edit section 2021 events and developments by topic Arts Architecture – Animation – Anime – Comics – Film (Horror, Science fiction) – Home video – Literature – Music (Classical, Country, Hip hop, Latin, Metal, Rock, UK, US) – Radio – Television (UK, US, Italy, Scotland) – Video games Politics and government Elections – International leaders – Sovereign states – Sovereign state leaders – Territorial governors Science and technology Archaeology – Biotechnology – Computing – Palaeontology – Quantum computing and communication – Senescence research – Sustainable energy research – Space/Astronomy – Spaceflight Environment and environmental sciences Birding/Ornithology – Climate change Transportation Aviation – Rail transport By place Afghanistan – Albania – Algeria – Andorra – Angola – Antarctica – Argentina – Armenia – Australia – Austria – Azerbaijan – Bangladesh – The Bahamas – Bahrain – Barbados – Belarus – Belgium – Benin – Bhutan – Bolivia – Bosnia and Herzegovina – Botswana – Brazil – Bulgaria – Burkina Faso – Burundi – Cambodia – Cameroon – Canada – Cape Verde – Central African Republic – Chad – Chile – China – Colombia – Costa Rica – Comoros – Croatia – Cuba – Cyprus – Czech Republic – Denmark – Ecuador – Egypt – El Salvador – Eritrea – Estonia – Ethiopia – European Union – Eswatini – Fiji – Finland – France – Gabon – Georgia – Germany – Ghana – Greece – Guatemala – Guinea – Guinea-Bissau – Guyana – Haiti – Honduras – Hong Kong – Hungary – Iceland – India – Indonesia – Iran – Iraq – Ireland – Israel – Italy – Ivory Coast – Japan – Jordan – Kazakhstan – Kenya – Kiribati – Kosovo – Kuwait – Kyrgyzstan – Laos – Latvia – Lebanon – Lesotho – Liberia – Libya – Lithuania – Luxembourg – Macau – Madagascar – Marshall Islands – Malawi – Malaysia – Mali – Malta – Mauritania – Mexico – Micronesia – Moldova – Mongolia – Montenegro – Morocco – Mozambique – Myanmar – Nauru – Namibia – Nepal – Netherlands – New Zealand – Nicaragua – Niger – Nigeria – North Korea – North Macedonia – Norway – Oman – Pakistan – Palau – Palestine – Panama – Papua New Guinea – Paraguay – Peru – Philippines – Poland – Portugal – Qatar – Romania – Russia – Rwanda – Samoa – Saudi Arabia – Senegal – Serbia – Seychelles – Singapore – Slovakia – Slovenia – Somalia – South Africa – Solomon Islands – South Korea – South Sudan – Spain – Sri Lanka – Sudan – Sweden – Switzerland – Syria – Taiwan – Tajikistan – Tanzania – Thailand – Togo – Tonga – Tunisia – Turkey – Turkmenistan – Tuvalu – Uganda – Ukraine – United Arab Emirates – United Kingdom – United States – Uruguay – Uzbekistan – Vanuatu – Venezuela – Vietnam – Yemen – Zambia – Zimbabwe Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments – Disestablishments Works and introductions categories Works – Introductions – Works entering the public domain Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2021. ...more edit section v t e Events by month 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2001 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2000 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1999 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1998 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1997 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1996 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1995 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1994 January February March April May June July August September October November December Portal:Current events Calendars Content listings Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured content Good articles Spoken articles Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Current_events&oldid=1054047874" Categories: All portals 2021 by day Current events portal 2021 Current events History portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages protected against vandalism Portals with triaged subpages from October 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Ænglisc ??????? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????? Banjar Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ??????? Bikol Central Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Dansk ?????? ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? IsiZulu Íslenska Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Li Niha Limburgs Magyar ?????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau ?????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Nederlands ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ????????? Piemontèis Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? ??? ?????????? ???? Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zeêuws ?? Dagbanli Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 19:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events Portal:Current events - Wikipedia Portal:Current events From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (October 2020) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events Edit instructions Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths Topics in the news Magdalena Andersson Magdalena Andersson (pictured) resigns shortly after being elected as the first female prime minister of Sweden. At least 46 people are killed in a bus crash near Bosnek, Bulgaria. Abdalla Hamdok is reinstated as Prime Minister of Sudan in an agreement following the October coup. In rallying, Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia win the World Championship, and Toyota takes the manufacturers' title. Ongoing: COVID-19 pandemic Recent deaths: Bill Virdon Peter Buck Doug Jones Cedric Robinson David Longdon Jay Last Nominate an article November 24, 2021 (2021-11-24) (Wednesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Tigray War TDF–OLA joint offensive Ethiopian prime minister Abiy Ahmed joins ENDF troops on the frontline to fight advancing rebel forces, transferring his day-to-day duties to deputy prime minister Demeke Mekonnen. (The Independent) Russo-Ukrainian War British foreign secretary Liz Truss warns Russia that any attack on Ukraine would be a "grave mistake", and that the UK is working closely with its NATO allies to provide support to Ukraine. (Reuters) Ukraine launches a "special operation" on the Belarusian border involving troops from the National Guard, police, armed forces, including anti-tank and airborne units, and other reserves amid fears of a migrant crisis and Russian military build-up on its borders. (RFE/RL) Anglophone Crisis Gunmen open fire at a school in Ekondo-Titi, Southwest Region, Cameroon, killing three children and a teacher. (AFP via Barron's) Syrian civil war Israel carries out airstrikes in Homs, Syria, killing two civilians and injuring six soldiers and a third civilian. (Al Jazeera) Disasters and accidents November 2021 English Channel disaster Thirty-one people drown after a boat carrying migrants sinks in the English Channel near Calais. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia Travel during the COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Singapore, COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia Singapore and Malaysia agree to the opening of a second quarantine-free vaccinated travel lane (VTL) through the Johor–Singapore Causeway beginning on 29 November 2021 using designated bus lanes, marking the reopening of the land border between the two countries. (CNA) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, COVID-19 drug development It is announced that the Merck & Co. antiviral drug molnupiravir will be available to Philippine patients after an agreement was signed between the Office of the Vice President of the Philippines and a local health care provider after the Food and Drug Administration gave a compassionate special permit for the drug. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 4,116 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 425,065. (CNA) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 25,864 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (The Washington Post) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 12,637 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1.045 million. (Thomson Reuters Foundation) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Netherlands reimposes mandatory 1.5 m (4 ft 11 in) social distancing measures in a place where COVID passports are not required amid persistently high number of COVID-19 cases. (Euronews) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovakia The Slovak government declares a 90-day state of emergency and will impose a two-week lockdown for entire population beginning tomorrow that will close non-essential shops and restaurants and limits people's movement to specific reasons as the country reports a record 10,315 new cases in the past 24 hours. (Politico.eu) COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada grants full approval of the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine, making Canada the first country to fully approve its single-dose vaccine. (The Hill) International relations Ethiopia–Ireland relations The Irish Department of Foreign Affairs advises all Irish citizens to leave Ethiopia immediately, due to the ongoing conflict. (Raidió Teilifís Éireann) Law and crime Murder of Ahmaud Arbery The three men who killed Ahmaud Arbery in Brunswick in Glynn County, Georgia, United States, in February 2020 are found guilty of murder and aggravated assault. (BBC) Protesters take to the streets in Honiara, Solomon Islands, calling for the resignation of incumbent prime minister Manasseh Sogavare. A building within the Parliament complex is set on fire as protesters proceed to engage in looting and arson while law enforcement personnel fire tear gas into crowds. (RNZ) (RNZ) Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Australia designates the entire Lebanese Shia militant group Hezbollah and the neo-Nazi paramilitary group The Base as terrorist organisations. (The Guardian) Politics and elections Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) November 23, 2021 (2021-11-23) (Tuesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks War in Donbas, Russo-Ukrainian War Ukraine warns of "combat preparedness" of separatist forces in eastern Ukraine as the Russian military presence on the border increases, warning of a potential new conflict. The separatists began mobilization of reservists yesterday. (Reuters) Arts and culture Artefacts from the Battle of Magdala in 1868 are returned to Ethiopia by the United Kingdom. (WION) Business and economy 2018–2021 Turkish currency and debt crisis The Turkish lira falls to an all-time low of 13.44 to the U.S. dollar. The crash was primarily caused by president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an's defence of the Central Bank's continued interest rate cuts amid soaring inflation. (CNBC) Disasters and accidents 2021 Bulgaria bus crash Forty-six people are killed and seven more are injured when a bus carrying North Macedonian tourists returning from Istanbul crashes and catches fire near Bosnek, Pernik Province, Bulgaria. (The New York Times) Two people are killed and 16 others are injured by an explosion at an EDePro rocket engine plant near Belgrade, Serbia. (7 News) Six people are dead and ten others are missing after the ferry they were travelling on capsizes in Kinniya, Sri Lanka. (ABC News Australia) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Switzerland COVID-19 vaccination in Switzerland Swissmedic approves the extension of booster doses of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine to people over the age of 16 years as well as high-risk people over the age of 12 years. (The Times of India) COVID-19 drug development The Swiss government signs a deal to reserve 8,640 doses of Merck & Co.'s antiviral drug molnupiravir beginning in January. (Reuters) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia Australia surpasses 200,000 cases of COVID-19. (Yahoo! News) Law and crime 2021 Waukesha Christmas parade attack An 8-year-old boy, injured during a Christmas-parade car rampage in Waukesha, Wisconsin, dies, bringing the death toll to six. Several of the sixty-two injured still remain in critical condition. (CNN) The suspect, 39-year-old Darrell Brooks, has been charged with six counts of first-degree intentional homicide, and the bail set at $5 million. (France 24) Colombian peace process United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres arrives in Colombia to commemorate the fifth year of the signing of the peace deal between the government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. (MercoPress) The Biden administration announces the delisting of the former FARC rebel group from the United States Department of State list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations where it had been listed since 1997. (Reuters) Sines v. Kessler A U.S. federal jury finds the organizers of 2017's Unite the Right rally, which includes white supremacists Richard B. Spencer, Jason Kessler, and Christopher Cantwell, liable for the violence that occurred and are ordered to pay US$26 million to nine individuals that suffered "physical and emotional damages". However, the jury was deadlocked on whether to convict on two federal conspiracy charges. (DW) (CNN) November 22, 2021 (2021-11-22) (Monday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Tigray War; Oromo conflict TDF–OLA joint offensive Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed, a former soldier, announces that he will lead his country's army from the battlefront beginning tomorrow. (The Washington Post) Insurgency in the Maghreb Gunmen open fire at a security post in Sanmatenga, Burkina Faso, killing ten civilians and nine gendarmes. Another person is injured and an healthcare center has been burned. (The Washington Post) Business and economy 2021 United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Bulb Energy, which supplies 1.7 million customers in the United Kingdom, collapses into administration, becoming the largest energy supplier to have ever collapsed. The company will also be the first energy supplier to be placed under "special administration", which means that the company will be run by the government regulator Ofgem. (The Guardian) Disasters and accidents Nine people die in a fire in a nursing home in the village of Royak, Dalgopol Municipality, Bulgaria. (Reuters) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria enters its fourth full nationwide lockdown that prohibits people from leaving their home except for specific reasons, while allowing schools to remain open, in order to reduce the number of new COVID-19 cases. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in France Prime Minister Jean Castex tests positive for COVID-19. (Reuters) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greece begins to implement measures that ban people who are unvaccinated or who have not recovered from COVID-19 from entering indoor public places and also mandates the wearing of masks in all workplaces in order to reduce the spread of COVID-19. (Ekathimerini) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovakia Slovakia imposes a lockdown for those who are unvaccinated against COVID-19, which prevents them from entering non-essential shops. Slovakia is currently experiencing one of the world's highest infection rates. (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Israel, COVID-19 vaccination in Israel Israel begins administering the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (The Times of Israel) COVID-19 pandemic in Singapore Singapore partially eases its social gathering restrictions and will allow up to five vaccinated people to dine in at food and drink establishments, hawker centres, and coffee shops as the country moves to the endemic phase due to a decrease in the number of new COVID-19 cases. (Singapore Business Report) COVID-19 pandemic in Kenya The Kenyan government approves a measure requiring people to present proof of vaccination in order to enter businesses, restaurants and government offices. This is also to encourage vaccination in a country where only 5% of the population is vaccinated. (The New York Times) International relations Bulgaria–United States relations The United States expresses a "deep concern" over Bulgarian President Rumen Radev's remarks, where he referred to Crimea as "Russian". Radev has expressed his views of maintaining "pragmatic ties" with Russia. The statement by the United States comes after Ukraine summoned the Bulgarian ambassador to Kyiv three days ago. (RFE/RL) Politics and elections Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) (Sunday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks 2021 Jerusalem shooting A Hamas gunman opens fire in the alleyways of Jerusalem's Old City, killing an Israeli man and wounding three others, before being shot and killed by Israeli forces. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Russia, COVID-19 vaccination in Russia President Vladimir Putin receives his booster dose of the Sputnik Light COVID-19 vaccine. (The Hill) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovenia Slovenia surpasses 400,000 cases of COVID-19. (UrduPoint) COVID-19 pandemic in Guadeloupe, Social impact of the COVID-19 pandemic It is announced that France will deploy dozens of gendarmerie to Guadeloupe following occurrences of rioting and looting in the archipelago over COVID-19 measures. At least 31 people were arrested overnight. Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin says that "the first message is that the state will stand firm". (Al Jazeera) COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia Malaysia surpasses 30,000 deaths from COVID-19. (Malay Mail) Law and crime 2021 Waukesha Christmas parade attack Five people are killed and over 40 injured by a hit and run driver who drove through an early Christmas parade in Waukesha, Wisconsin, United States. A person of interest is in custody. (ABC News) Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgian police fire tear gas and water cannons after violence broke out at the end of a mass demonstration in Brussels that involved 35,000 people against tougher COVID-19-related measures. (The Independent) The Taliban issues new guidelines for television broadcasts, mandating that female presenters and journalists wear Islamic coverings, banning entertainment considered blasphemous or insulting to Afghans, and prohibiting films that promote foreign cultural values, among others. (BBC News) Politics and elections 2021 Chilean general election Chileans go to the polls to elect their new president, who will succeed outgoing president Sebastián Piñera. (Reuters) Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) Aftermath of the October 2021 Sudanese coup d'état Abdalla Hamdok is reinstated as Prime Minister of Sudan following a political agreement with Abdel Fattah al-Burhan. (BBC News) Sports 2021 World Rally Championship Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia win the 2021 Championship, while Toyota secure the manufacturers' title. November 20, 2021 (2021-11-20) (Saturday) edit history watch Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Hong Kong Hong Kong authorises the usage of the Sinovac CoronaVac vaccine for children between the ages of 3 and 17 years. (The Guardian) COVID-19 pandemic in Iraq Iraq receives 1.2 million doses of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine through the COVAX initiative. (AFP via Barron's) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, COVID-19 community quarantines in the Philippines The Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF) has fully implemented nationwide, the Alert Level System (ALS) formally replacing the previous community quarantine system that had been in place since March 2020. (Rappler) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgium begins to implement mandatory face masks in indoor places and outdoor events. The country is also enforcing teleworking four days a week for all companies until 12 December. (The Brussels Times) COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 22,936 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) Water crisis in Iran, 2016–2021 Iranian protests Thousands of people gather at the Khaju Bridge in Isfahan to protest the government's water and energy policies. (Al Jazeera) Law and crime Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Three people are seriously injured after being shot by police during protests against COVID-19 measures in Rotterdam, Netherlands. Fifty-one people are also arrested, half of whom are less than 18 years old. (Reuters) Politics and elections 2021 Malacca state election Barisan Nasional (BN) retains power, winning 21 out of 28 seats, defeating its rivals Pakatan Harapan (PH) and Perikatan Nasional (PN). (The Straits Times) November 19, 2021 (2021-11-19) (Friday) edit history watch Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The provincial government of British Columbia, Canada, declares a state of emergency in response to ongoing risks from floods and mudslides. Effective immediately until December 1, citizens in affected regions, including the Lower Mainland and Vancouver Island, are limited to 30 litres of diesel and gasoline purchased at fuel stations. Vehicles used for essential services, such as emergency response, commercial transport, and public transit, are exempt from this order and granted unlimited access to cardlock gas stations ordinarily used by the commercial trucking industry. Price gouging at retail gas stations and the resale of fuel is prohibited. Restrictions on non-essential travel along damaged highways are also set in place. (Global News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austrian chancellor Alexander Schallenberg announces a full nationwide lockdown for the entire population starting on 22 November, amid a surge in new COVID-19 cases that has overwhelmed hospitals. Schallenberg also announces that COVID-19 vaccinations will become mandatory as of 1 February 2022. (The Independent) Austria reports a record for the second consecutive day of 15,809 new cases of COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,027,274. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany The southern German state of Bavaria cancels all Christmas markets and imposes a lockdown in all districts that have a seven-day incidence rate of over 1,000 per 100,000 people amid a substantial increase in the number of new COVID-19 cases. However, schools and kindergartens will continue to remain open. (Deutsche Welle) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 11,289 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 998,488. (Budapest Business Journal) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the third consecutive day of 1,254 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 261,589. (Interfax) COVID-19 pandemic in North America COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada approves the usage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (Global News) COVID-19 pandemic in Grenada Argentina officially announces that it will donate 11,000 doses of the Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine to Grenada. (Memo) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, COVID-19 vaccination in the United States The U.S. CDC authorizes the booster dose of either Pfizer or Moderna COVID-19 vaccine for the general public, which means that all adults are eligible to receive their booster dose. (CNBC) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Victoria Restrictions are further eased for fully vaccinated Victorians as 90% of adults are now fully vaccinated. Mask wearing is still required in some indoor spaces and limits remain on daily visitor numbers to care facilities. Additionally, unvaccinated people continue to be banned from entering all non-essential businesses and also from employment in many industries. (The Guardian) International relations Palestine–United Kingdom relations, Israel-United Kingdom relations The United Kingdom outlaws Hamas, the Palestinian militant group which serves as the ruling party of the Gaza Strip, and declares the party as a terrorist group. Previously, only the party's armed wing was outlawed. (Reuters) Law and crime Kenosha unrest shooting Kyle Rittenhouse, who shot three people during the unrest in Kenosha, Wisconsin, United States, in August 2020, is found not guilty on all counts. (NPR) Hundreds of people march in Chicago, New York City and Portland to protest the verdict of the trial. (WCBS-TV) (WBBM-TV) (ABC News) Politics and elections Vice Presidency of Kamala Harris While U.S. President Joe Biden undergoes medical treatment, U.S. Vice President Kamala Harris is transfered presidential power for a short period of time, making her the first female acting president of the United States. (Forbes) Iraqi Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr announces that he is dissolving the Promised Day Brigade, the armed faction loyal to him. Yesterday, al-Sadr said that non-governmental militias should hand in their weapons. (Reuters) November 18, 2021 (2021-11-18) (Thursday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) Arts and culture 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany COVID-19 vaccination in Germany The Standing Committee on Vaccination recommends that a booster dose of an mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine should be given to all adults over the age of 18 years. (Deutsche Welle) Germany reports a record for the second consecutive day of 65,371 new cases of COVID-19. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 15,145 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,011,465. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis announces that beginning on November 22, unvaccinated people will be banned from entering all indoor venues for which they could previously present a negative test result, due to an increase in new COVID-19 cases. Mitsotakis also announces that vaccine passports will expire after seven months for people over the age of 60 years and urges people in this age group to receive a booster dose. (Greek Reporter) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands The Netherlands reports a record for the fourth consecutive day of 23,860 new cases of COVID-19. (Dutch News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the second consecutive day of 1,251 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 260,335. (The Moscow Times) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Laos Laos reports a record 1,041 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 58,798. (Vietnam Plus) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 3,292 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 406,605. (The Korea Herald) A lab in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States, is placed on temporary lockdown by the CDC after several vials labeled "smallpox" are discovered in a freezer. (CBS News) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Belarus suspends electricity supplies to Ukraine, in "accordance with the established procedure for interaction within the framework of contractual relations", according to a statement from the Belarusian Ministry of Energy. (Ukranews) Law and crime At the Birmingham Crown Court in England, Zephaniah McLeod is sentenced to at least 21 years imprisonment for manslaughter and four counts of attempted murder after killing one person and wounding seven others during a 90-minute stabbing spree in September 2020. (BBC News) The New York Supreme Court vacates the convictions of Muhammad Abdul Aziz (formerly Norman 3X Butler) and the late Khalil Islam (formerly Thomas 15X Johnson) for the 1965 assassination of Malcolm X. The two men were convicted alongside Thomas Hagan (formerly Talmadge Hayer) in 1966. An investigation led by Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr. discovered that the FBI and the NYPD had withheld evidence that would have acquitted Aziz and Islam. (The New York Times) Politics and elections 2021 Tongan general election Tongans go to the polls to elect their new government. (RNZ) More November 2021 events... Time: 22:02 UTC|Day: 24 November ?November 2021? S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 More November 2021 events...    About this page Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia Ongoing events Disasters Climate crisis COVID-19 pandemic 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak 2021 Atlantic hurricane season 2021 Pacific typhoon season Madagascar food crisis Water crisis in Iran Yemeni famine 2021 La Palma eruption Economic 2020–2021 global chip shortage 2021 global supply chain crisis COVID-19 recession Lebanese liquidity crisis Pandora Papers leak Sri Lankan economic and food crisis Turkish currency and debt crisis United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Politics Belarus?European Union border crisis Brazilian protests Colombian tax reform protests Eswatini protests Haitian protests Indian farmers' protests Insulate Britain protests Jersey dispute Libyan peace process Malaysian political crisis Myanmar protests Nicaraguan protests Nigerian protests Persian Gulf crisis Peruvian crisis Romanian political crisis Russian election protests Tigrayan peace process Thai protests Tunisian political crisis United States racial unrest Venezuelan presidential crisis edit section Elections and referendums Recent November 14: Bulgaria, President (1st), National Assembly 14: Argentina, Chamber of Deputies, Senate 18: Tonga, Legislative Assembly 21: Bulgaria, President (2nd) 21: Chile, President (1st), Senate, Chamber of Deputies Upcoming November 28: Honduras, President, National Congress 28: Kyrgyzstan, Supreme Council December 4: The Gambia, President edit section Trials Recently concluded Belarus: Maria Kalesnikava France: Nicolas Sarkozy Myanmar: Danny Fenster Rwanda: Paul Rusesabagina United States: Kyle Rittenhouse, Yanjun Xu, Lev Parnas, R. Kelly, Robert Durst Ongoing Armenia: Serzh Sargsyan Belarus: Sergei Tikhanovsky Canada: Raj Grewal France: Brussels ISIL Indonesia: Nurdin Abdullah Israel: Benjamin Netanyahu Italy: Matteo Salvini Kyrgyzstan: Almazbek Atambayev Malta: Yorgen Fenech Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi Philippines: Leila de Lima Sudan: Omar al-Bashir United States: Elizabeth Holmes, Killing of Ahmaud Arbery Upcoming Indonesia: Azis Syamsuddin, Alex Noerdin Kosovo: Hashim Thaçi, Kadri Veseli Nigeria: Nnamdi Kanu United States: Allen Weisselberg, Ghislaine Maxwell, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Jussie Smollett Vatican City: Giovanni Angelo Becciu ICC: Ali Kushayb edit section Sport Association football 2021–22 UEFA Europa League 2021–22 UEFA Champions league 2021–22 Premier League 2021–22 Bundesliga 2021–22 Serie A 2021–22 La Liga 2021 Copa Libertadores final stages 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification 2020–21 UEFA Nations League 2021 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A 2021 MLS Cup Playoffs American football 2021 NCAA Division I FBS football season 2021 NCAA Division I FCS football season 2021 NFL season Baseball 2021 NPB season Basketball 2021–22 NBA season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Women's Basketball Season Cricket 2021–23 ICC World Test Championship 2020–23 ICC Cricket World Cup Super League 2019–23 ICC Cricket World Cup League 2 2019–22 ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League  Canadian football 2021 CFL season Golf 2020 PGA Tour Champions 2021 Ladies European Tour 2021–22 PGA Tour Ice hockey 2021–22 NHL season 2021–22 IIHF Continental Cup Motorsport 2021 Formula One Championship 2021 Rally Championship 2021 MotoGP 2021 Supercars Championship Rugby union 2021–22 Premiership Rugby 2021–22 United Rugby Championship 2021–22 Top 14 2021 Super Rugby season Tennis 2021 ATP Tour 2021 WTA Tour 2020–21 Davis Cup (Finals) Other sports seasons 2021–22 International cricket season 2021–22 snooker season 2021–22 curling season More details – current sports events edit section Recent deaths November 23: Bill Virdon 23: James Fitz-Allen Mitchell 23: Chun Doo-hwan 22: Doug Jones 18: Peter Buck 18: Mick Rock 18: Ardeshir Zahedi 17: Dave Frishberg 17: Art LaFleur 17: Young Dolph 16: Ri Yong-suk 15: Julio Lugo 15: Clarissa Eden 15: Daulet Sembaev 14: Etel Adnan 14: W. Sterling Cary 13: Sam Huff 13: Wilbur Smith 12: Matthew Festing 11: F. W. de Klerk 11: Glen de Vries 11: Graeme Edge 11: Winter 10: Jun Hong Lu 9: Max Cleland 9: Austin Currie 8: Pedro Feliciano 8: Seán FitzPatrick 8: Mahlagha Mallah 8: Abdul Wahab Dalimunthe 7: Dean Stockwell 6: Angelo Mosca 6: Shawn Rhoden 6: Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé 6: Muamer Zukorli? 6: Yukhym Zvyahilsky 5: Marília Mendonça 4: Ruth Ann Minner 4: Lionel Blair 3: Georgie Dann 2: Sabah Fakhri 1: Aaron Beck October 31: Catherine Tizard 30: Jerry Remy 30: Alan Davidson 30: Bert Newton 29: Clément Mouamba 29: Iran Darroudi 29: Ashley Mallett 29: José Antonio González 26: Mort Sahl 26: Walter Smith 26: Roh Tae-woo 25: Fofi Gennimata edit section Ongoing conflicts Africa Angola Cabinda War Cameroon Anglophone Crisis Central African Republic Civil War Chad Insurgency in Northern Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Kivu conflict Allied Democratic Forces insurgency Ituri conflict Lord's Resistance Army insurgency Kamwina Nsapu rebellion Ethiopia Tigray War (spillover) Oromo conflict Ethiopia and Sudan Sudanese–Ethiopian clashes Ghana Western Togoland Rebellion Maghreb and Sahel regions Maghreb insurgency Mali Mali War Mozambique Insurgency in Cabo Delgado Nigeria Boko Haram insurgency (incl. Lake Chad region) Communal conflicts in Nigeria Senegal Casamance conflict Somalia Civil war South Sudan Ethnic violence in South Sudan Sudan War in Darfur South Kordofan conflict Sudanese nomadic conflicts (incl. South Sudan) Tunisia ISIL insurgency in Tunisia Western Sahara Western Sahara conflict 2020–2021 Western Saharan clashes Americas Colombia Colombian conflict Mexico Mexican drug war Peru Internal conflict in Peru Paraguay Insurgency in Paraguay Asia-Pacific Afghanistan Panjshir conflict Islamic State–Taliban conflict India Insurgency in Northeast India Assam separatist movements Insurgency in Manipur Ethnic conflict in Nagaland Khalistan movement Naxalite–Maoist insurgency India and Pakistan Kashmir conflict Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines Moro conflict Cross border attacks in Sabah Indonesia Papua conflict Myanmar Internal conflict in Myanmar Kachin conflict Karen conflict Rohingya conflict Pakistan Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Insurgency in Balochistan Philippines Communist rebellion Philippine drug war Thailand South Thailand insurgency Europe Armenia and Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Ukraine War in Donbas Russo-Ukrainian War Ireland and the UK Dissident Irish republican campaign Turkey Kurdish–Turkish conflict Global War on terror Middle East Egypt Sinai insurgency Iran and the Persian Gulf Iran–Israel proxy conflict Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict Sistan and Baluchestan insurgency Arab separatism in Khuzestan Kurdish separatism in Iran Iraq Iraqi conflict American-led intervention in Iraq Iranian intervention in Iraq Iraq and Syria (map) International military intervention against ISIL Israel and Gaza Israel and Syria Israeli-Syrian border conflict Israeli-Syrian ceasefire line incidents Syria American-led intervention in Syria Russian military intervention in the Syrian civil war Turkish occupation of northern Syria Yemen and Saudi Arabia Yemeni Civil War Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen Houthi–Saudi Arabian conflict Further information: List of ongoing armed conflicts edit section 2021 events and developments by topic Arts Architecture – Animation – Anime – Comics – Film (Horror, Science fiction) – Home video – Literature – Music (Classical, Country, Hip hop, Latin, Metal, Rock, UK, US) – Radio – Television (UK, US, Italy, Scotland) – Video games Politics and government Elections – International leaders – Sovereign states – Sovereign state leaders – Territorial governors Science and technology Archaeology – Biotechnology – Computing – Palaeontology – Quantum computing and communication – Senescence research – Sustainable energy research – Space/Astronomy – Spaceflight Environment and environmental sciences Birding/Ornithology – Climate change Transportation Aviation – Rail transport By place Afghanistan – Albania – Algeria – Andorra – Angola – Antarctica – Argentina – Armenia – Australia – Austria – Azerbaijan – Bangladesh – The Bahamas – Bahrain – Barbados – Belarus – Belgium – Benin – Bhutan – Bolivia – Bosnia and Herzegovina – Botswana – Brazil – Bulgaria – Burkina Faso – Burundi – Cambodia – Cameroon – Canada – Cape Verde – Central African Republic – Chad – Chile – China – Colombia – Costa Rica – Comoros – Croatia – Cuba – Cyprus – Czech Republic – Denmark – Ecuador – Egypt – El Salvador – Eritrea – Estonia – Ethiopia – European Union – Eswatini – Fiji – Finland – France – Gabon – Georgia – Germany – Ghana – Greece – Guatemala – Guinea – Guinea-Bissau – Guyana – Haiti – Honduras – Hong Kong – Hungary – Iceland – India – Indonesia – Iran – Iraq – Ireland – Israel – Italy – Ivory Coast – Japan – Jordan – Kazakhstan – Kenya – Kiribati – Kosovo – Kuwait – Kyrgyzstan – Laos – Latvia – Lebanon – Lesotho – Liberia – Libya – Lithuania – Luxembourg – Macau – Madagascar – Marshall Islands – Malawi – Malaysia – Mali – Malta – Mauritania – Mexico – Micronesia – Moldova – Mongolia – Montenegro – Morocco – Mozambique – Myanmar – Nauru – Namibia – Nepal – Netherlands – New Zealand – Nicaragua – Niger – Nigeria – North Korea – North Macedonia – Norway – Oman – Pakistan – Palau – Palestine – Panama – Papua New Guinea – Paraguay – Peru – Philippines – Poland – Portugal – Qatar – Romania – Russia – Rwanda – Samoa – Saudi Arabia – Senegal – Serbia – Seychelles – Singapore – Slovakia – Slovenia – Somalia – South Africa – Solomon Islands – South Korea – South Sudan – Spain – Sri Lanka – Sudan – Sweden – Switzerland – Syria – Taiwan – Tajikistan – Tanzania – Thailand – Togo – Tonga – Tunisia – Turkey – Turkmenistan – Tuvalu – Uganda – Ukraine – United Arab Emirates – United Kingdom – United States – Uruguay – Uzbekistan – Vanuatu – Venezuela – Vietnam – Yemen – Zambia – Zimbabwe Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments – Disestablishments Works and introductions categories Works – Introductions – Works entering the public domain Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2021. ...more edit section v t e Events by month 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2001 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2000 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1999 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1998 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1997 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1996 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1995 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1994 January February March April May June July August September October November December Portal:Current events Calendars Content listings Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured content Good articles Spoken articles Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Current_events&oldid=1054047874" Categories: All portals 2021 by day Current events portal 2021 Current events History portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages protected against vandalism Portals with triaged subpages from October 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Ænglisc ??????? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????? Banjar Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ??????? Bikol Central Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Dansk ?????? ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? IsiZulu Íslenska Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Li Niha Limburgs Magyar ?????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau ?????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Nederlands ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ????????? Piemontèis Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? ??? ?????????? ???? Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zeêuws ?? Dagbanli Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 19:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events Portal:Current events - Wikipedia Portal:Current events From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (October 2020) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events Edit instructions Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths Topics in the news Magdalena Andersson Magdalena Andersson (pictured) resigns shortly after being elected as the first female prime minister of Sweden. At least 46 people are killed in a bus crash near Bosnek, Bulgaria. Abdalla Hamdok is reinstated as Prime Minister of Sudan in an agreement following the October coup. In rallying, Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia win the World Championship, and Toyota takes the manufacturers' title. Ongoing: COVID-19 pandemic Recent deaths: Bill Virdon Peter Buck Doug Jones Cedric Robinson David Longdon Jay Last Nominate an article November 24, 2021 (2021-11-24) (Wednesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Tigray War TDF–OLA joint offensive Ethiopian prime minister Abiy Ahmed joins ENDF troops on the frontline to fight advancing rebel forces, transferring his day-to-day duties to deputy prime minister Demeke Mekonnen. (The Independent) Russo-Ukrainian War British foreign secretary Liz Truss warns Russia that any attack on Ukraine would be a "grave mistake", and that the UK is working closely with its NATO allies to provide support to Ukraine. (Reuters) Ukraine launches a "special operation" on the Belarusian border involving troops from the National Guard, police, armed forces, including anti-tank and airborne units, and other reserves amid fears of a migrant crisis and Russian military build-up on its borders. (RFE/RL) Anglophone Crisis Gunmen open fire at a school in Ekondo-Titi, Southwest Region, Cameroon, killing three children and a teacher. (AFP via Barron's) Syrian civil war Israel carries out airstrikes in Homs, Syria, killing two civilians and injuring six soldiers and a third civilian. (Al Jazeera) Disasters and accidents November 2021 English Channel disaster Thirty-one people drown after a boat carrying migrants sinks in the English Channel near Calais. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia Travel during the COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Singapore, COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia Singapore and Malaysia agree to the opening of a second quarantine-free vaccinated travel lane (VTL) through the Johor–Singapore Causeway beginning on 29 November 2021 using designated bus lanes, marking the reopening of the land border between the two countries. (CNA) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, COVID-19 drug development It is announced that the Merck & Co. antiviral drug molnupiravir will be available to Philippine patients after an agreement was signed between the Office of the Vice President of the Philippines and a local health care provider after the Food and Drug Administration gave a compassionate special permit for the drug. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 4,116 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 425,065. (CNA) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 25,864 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (The Washington Post) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 12,637 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1.045 million. (Thomson Reuters Foundation) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Netherlands reimposes mandatory 1.5 m (4 ft 11 in) social distancing measures in a place where COVID passports are not required amid persistently high number of COVID-19 cases. (Euronews) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovakia The Slovak government declares a 90-day state of emergency and will impose a two-week lockdown for entire population beginning tomorrow that will close non-essential shops and restaurants and limits people's movement to specific reasons as the country reports a record 10,315 new cases in the past 24 hours. (Politico.eu) COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada grants full approval of the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine, making Canada the first country to fully approve its single-dose vaccine. (The Hill) International relations Ethiopia–Ireland relations The Irish Department of Foreign Affairs advises all Irish citizens to leave Ethiopia immediately, due to the ongoing conflict. (Raidió Teilifís Éireann) Law and crime Murder of Ahmaud Arbery The three men who killed Ahmaud Arbery in Brunswick in Glynn County, Georgia, United States, in February 2020 are found guilty of murder and aggravated assault. (BBC) Protesters take to the streets in Honiara, Solomon Islands, calling for the resignation of incumbent prime minister Manasseh Sogavare. A building within the Parliament complex is set on fire as protesters proceed to engage in looting and arson while law enforcement personnel fire tear gas into crowds. (RNZ) (RNZ) Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Australia designates the entire Lebanese Shia militant group Hezbollah and the neo-Nazi paramilitary group The Base as terrorist organisations. (The Guardian) Politics and elections Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) November 23, 2021 (2021-11-23) (Tuesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks War in Donbas, Russo-Ukrainian War Ukraine warns of "combat preparedness" of separatist forces in eastern Ukraine as the Russian military presence on the border increases, warning of a potential new conflict. The separatists began mobilization of reservists yesterday. (Reuters) Arts and culture Artefacts from the Battle of Magdala in 1868 are returned to Ethiopia by the United Kingdom. (WION) Business and economy 2018–2021 Turkish currency and debt crisis The Turkish lira falls to an all-time low of 13.44 to the U.S. dollar. The crash was primarily caused by president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an's defence of the Central Bank's continued interest rate cuts amid soaring inflation. (CNBC) Disasters and accidents 2021 Bulgaria bus crash Forty-six people are killed and seven more are injured when a bus carrying North Macedonian tourists returning from Istanbul crashes and catches fire near Bosnek, Pernik Province, Bulgaria. (The New York Times) Two people are killed and 16 others are injured by an explosion at an EDePro rocket engine plant near Belgrade, Serbia. (7 News) Six people are dead and ten others are missing after the ferry they were travelling on capsizes in Kinniya, Sri Lanka. (ABC News Australia) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Switzerland COVID-19 vaccination in Switzerland Swissmedic approves the extension of booster doses of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine to people over the age of 16 years as well as high-risk people over the age of 12 years. (The Times of India) COVID-19 drug development The Swiss government signs a deal to reserve 8,640 doses of Merck & Co.'s antiviral drug molnupiravir beginning in January. (Reuters) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia Australia surpasses 200,000 cases of COVID-19. (Yahoo! News) Law and crime 2021 Waukesha Christmas parade attack An 8-year-old boy, injured during a Christmas-parade car rampage in Waukesha, Wisconsin, dies, bringing the death toll to six. Several of the sixty-two injured still remain in critical condition. (CNN) The suspect, 39-year-old Darrell Brooks, has been charged with six counts of first-degree intentional homicide, and the bail set at $5 million. (France 24) Colombian peace process United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres arrives in Colombia to commemorate the fifth year of the signing of the peace deal between the government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. (MercoPress) The Biden administration announces the delisting of the former FARC rebel group from the United States Department of State list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations where it had been listed since 1997. (Reuters) Sines v. Kessler A U.S. federal jury finds the organizers of 2017's Unite the Right rally, which includes white supremacists Richard B. Spencer, Jason Kessler, and Christopher Cantwell, liable for the violence that occurred and are ordered to pay US$26 million to nine individuals that suffered "physical and emotional damages". However, the jury was deadlocked on whether to convict on two federal conspiracy charges. (DW) (CNN) November 22, 2021 (2021-11-22) (Monday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Tigray War; Oromo conflict TDF–OLA joint offensive Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed, a former soldier, announces that he will lead his country's army from the battlefront beginning tomorrow. (The Washington Post) Insurgency in the Maghreb Gunmen open fire at a security post in Sanmatenga, Burkina Faso, killing ten civilians and nine gendarmes. Another person is injured and an healthcare center has been burned. (The Washington Post) Business and economy 2021 United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Bulb Energy, which supplies 1.7 million customers in the United Kingdom, collapses into administration, becoming the largest energy supplier to have ever collapsed. The company will also be the first energy supplier to be placed under "special administration", which means that the company will be run by the government regulator Ofgem. (The Guardian) Disasters and accidents Nine people die in a fire in a nursing home in the village of Royak, Dalgopol Municipality, Bulgaria. (Reuters) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria enters its fourth full nationwide lockdown that prohibits people from leaving their home except for specific reasons, while allowing schools to remain open, in order to reduce the number of new COVID-19 cases. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in France Prime Minister Jean Castex tests positive for COVID-19. (Reuters) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greece begins to implement measures that ban people who are unvaccinated or who have not recovered from COVID-19 from entering indoor public places and also mandates the wearing of masks in all workplaces in order to reduce the spread of COVID-19. (Ekathimerini) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovakia Slovakia imposes a lockdown for those who are unvaccinated against COVID-19, which prevents them from entering non-essential shops. Slovakia is currently experiencing one of the world's highest infection rates. (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Israel, COVID-19 vaccination in Israel Israel begins administering the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (The Times of Israel) COVID-19 pandemic in Singapore Singapore partially eases its social gathering restrictions and will allow up to five vaccinated people to dine in at food and drink establishments, hawker centres, and coffee shops as the country moves to the endemic phase due to a decrease in the number of new COVID-19 cases. (Singapore Business Report) COVID-19 pandemic in Kenya The Kenyan government approves a measure requiring people to present proof of vaccination in order to enter businesses, restaurants and government offices. This is also to encourage vaccination in a country where only 5% of the population is vaccinated. (The New York Times) International relations Bulgaria–United States relations The United States expresses a "deep concern" over Bulgarian President Rumen Radev's remarks, where he referred to Crimea as "Russian". Radev has expressed his views of maintaining "pragmatic ties" with Russia. The statement by the United States comes after Ukraine summoned the Bulgarian ambassador to Kyiv three days ago. (RFE/RL) Politics and elections Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) (Sunday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks 2021 Jerusalem shooting A Hamas gunman opens fire in the alleyways of Jerusalem's Old City, killing an Israeli man and wounding three others, before being shot and killed by Israeli forces. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Russia, COVID-19 vaccination in Russia President Vladimir Putin receives his booster dose of the Sputnik Light COVID-19 vaccine. (The Hill) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovenia Slovenia surpasses 400,000 cases of COVID-19. (UrduPoint) COVID-19 pandemic in Guadeloupe, Social impact of the COVID-19 pandemic It is announced that France will deploy dozens of gendarmerie to Guadeloupe following occurrences of rioting and looting in the archipelago over COVID-19 measures. At least 31 people were arrested overnight. Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin says that "the first message is that the state will stand firm". (Al Jazeera) COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia Malaysia surpasses 30,000 deaths from COVID-19. (Malay Mail) Law and crime 2021 Waukesha Christmas parade attack Five people are killed and over 40 injured by a hit and run driver who drove through an early Christmas parade in Waukesha, Wisconsin, United States. A person of interest is in custody. (ABC News) Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgian police fire tear gas and water cannons after violence broke out at the end of a mass demonstration in Brussels that involved 35,000 people against tougher COVID-19-related measures. (The Independent) The Taliban issues new guidelines for television broadcasts, mandating that female presenters and journalists wear Islamic coverings, banning entertainment considered blasphemous or insulting to Afghans, and prohibiting films that promote foreign cultural values, among others. (BBC News) Politics and elections 2021 Chilean general election Chileans go to the polls to elect their new president, who will succeed outgoing president Sebastián Piñera. (Reuters) Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) Aftermath of the October 2021 Sudanese coup d'état Abdalla Hamdok is reinstated as Prime Minister of Sudan following a political agreement with Abdel Fattah al-Burhan. (BBC News) Sports 2021 World Rally Championship Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia win the 2021 Championship, while Toyota secure the manufacturers' title. November 20, 2021 (2021-11-20) (Saturday) edit history watch Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Hong Kong Hong Kong authorises the usage of the Sinovac CoronaVac vaccine for children between the ages of 3 and 17 years. (The Guardian) COVID-19 pandemic in Iraq Iraq receives 1.2 million doses of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine through the COVAX initiative. (AFP via Barron's) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, COVID-19 community quarantines in the Philippines The Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF) has fully implemented nationwide, the Alert Level System (ALS) formally replacing the previous community quarantine system that had been in place since March 2020. (Rappler) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgium begins to implement mandatory face masks in indoor places and outdoor events. The country is also enforcing teleworking four days a week for all companies until 12 December. (The Brussels Times) COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 22,936 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) Water crisis in Iran, 2016–2021 Iranian protests Thousands of people gather at the Khaju Bridge in Isfahan to protest the government's water and energy policies. (Al Jazeera) Law and crime Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Three people are seriously injured after being shot by police during protests against COVID-19 measures in Rotterdam, Netherlands. Fifty-one people are also arrested, half of whom are less than 18 years old. (Reuters) Politics and elections 2021 Malacca state election Barisan Nasional (BN) retains power, winning 21 out of 28 seats, defeating its rivals Pakatan Harapan (PH) and Perikatan Nasional (PN). (The Straits Times) November 19, 2021 (2021-11-19) (Friday) edit history watch Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The provincial government of British Columbia, Canada, declares a state of emergency in response to ongoing risks from floods and mudslides. Effective immediately until December 1, citizens in affected regions, including the Lower Mainland and Vancouver Island, are limited to 30 litres of diesel and gasoline purchased at fuel stations. Vehicles used for essential services, such as emergency response, commercial transport, and public transit, are exempt from this order and granted unlimited access to cardlock gas stations ordinarily used by the commercial trucking industry. Price gouging at retail gas stations and the resale of fuel is prohibited. Restrictions on non-essential travel along damaged highways are also set in place. (Global News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austrian chancellor Alexander Schallenberg announces a full nationwide lockdown for the entire population starting on 22 November, amid a surge in new COVID-19 cases that has overwhelmed hospitals. Schallenberg also announces that COVID-19 vaccinations will become mandatory as of 1 February 2022. (The Independent) Austria reports a record for the second consecutive day of 15,809 new cases of COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,027,274. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany The southern German state of Bavaria cancels all Christmas markets and imposes a lockdown in all districts that have a seven-day incidence rate of over 1,000 per 100,000 people amid a substantial increase in the number of new COVID-19 cases. However, schools and kindergartens will continue to remain open. (Deutsche Welle) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 11,289 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 998,488. (Budapest Business Journal) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the third consecutive day of 1,254 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 261,589. (Interfax) COVID-19 pandemic in North America COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada approves the usage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (Global News) COVID-19 pandemic in Grenada Argentina officially announces that it will donate 11,000 doses of the Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine to Grenada. (Memo) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, COVID-19 vaccination in the United States The U.S. CDC authorizes the booster dose of either Pfizer or Moderna COVID-19 vaccine for the general public, which means that all adults are eligible to receive their booster dose. (CNBC) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Victoria Restrictions are further eased for fully vaccinated Victorians as 90% of adults are now fully vaccinated. Mask wearing is still required in some indoor spaces and limits remain on daily visitor numbers to care facilities. Additionally, unvaccinated people continue to be banned from entering all non-essential businesses and also from employment in many industries. (The Guardian) International relations Palestine–United Kingdom relations, Israel-United Kingdom relations The United Kingdom outlaws Hamas, the Palestinian militant group which serves as the ruling party of the Gaza Strip, and declares the party as a terrorist group. Previously, only the party's armed wing was outlawed. (Reuters) Law and crime Kenosha unrest shooting Kyle Rittenhouse, who shot three people during the unrest in Kenosha, Wisconsin, United States, in August 2020, is found not guilty on all counts. (NPR) Hundreds of people march in Chicago, New York City and Portland to protest the verdict of the trial. (WCBS-TV) (WBBM-TV) (ABC News) Politics and elections Vice Presidency of Kamala Harris While U.S. President Joe Biden undergoes medical treatment, U.S. Vice President Kamala Harris is transfered presidential power for a short period of time, making her the first female acting president of the United States. (Forbes) Iraqi Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr announces that he is dissolving the Promised Day Brigade, the armed faction loyal to him. Yesterday, al-Sadr said that non-governmental militias should hand in their weapons. (Reuters) November 18, 2021 (2021-11-18) (Thursday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) Arts and culture 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany COVID-19 vaccination in Germany The Standing Committee on Vaccination recommends that a booster dose of an mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine should be given to all adults over the age of 18 years. (Deutsche Welle) Germany reports a record for the second consecutive day of 65,371 new cases of COVID-19. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 15,145 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,011,465. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis announces that beginning on November 22, unvaccinated people will be banned from entering all indoor venues for which they could previously present a negative test result, due to an increase in new COVID-19 cases. Mitsotakis also announces that vaccine passports will expire after seven months for people over the age of 60 years and urges people in this age group to receive a booster dose. (Greek Reporter) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands The Netherlands reports a record for the fourth consecutive day of 23,860 new cases of COVID-19. (Dutch News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the second consecutive day of 1,251 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 260,335. (The Moscow Times) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Laos Laos reports a record 1,041 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 58,798. (Vietnam Plus) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 3,292 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 406,605. (The Korea Herald) A lab in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States, is placed on temporary lockdown by the CDC after several vials labeled "smallpox" are discovered in a freezer. (CBS News) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Belarus suspends electricity supplies to Ukraine, in "accordance with the established procedure for interaction within the framework of contractual relations", according to a statement from the Belarusian Ministry of Energy. (Ukranews) Law and crime At the Birmingham Crown Court in England, Zephaniah McLeod is sentenced to at least 21 years imprisonment for manslaughter and four counts of attempted murder after killing one person and wounding seven others during a 90-minute stabbing spree in September 2020. (BBC News) The New York Supreme Court vacates the convictions of Muhammad Abdul Aziz (formerly Norman 3X Butler) and the late Khalil Islam (formerly Thomas 15X Johnson) for the 1965 assassination of Malcolm X. The two men were convicted alongside Thomas Hagan (formerly Talmadge Hayer) in 1966. An investigation led by Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr. discovered that the FBI and the NYPD had withheld evidence that would have acquitted Aziz and Islam. (The New York Times) Politics and elections 2021 Tongan general election Tongans go to the polls to elect their new government. (RNZ) More November 2021 events... Time: 22:02 UTC|Day: 24 November ?November 2021? S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 More November 2021 events...    About this page Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia Ongoing events Disasters Climate crisis COVID-19 pandemic 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak 2021 Atlantic hurricane season 2021 Pacific typhoon season Madagascar food crisis Water crisis in Iran Yemeni famine 2021 La Palma eruption Economic 2020–2021 global chip shortage 2021 global supply chain crisis COVID-19 recession Lebanese liquidity crisis Pandora Papers leak Sri Lankan economic and food crisis Turkish currency and debt crisis United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Politics Belarus?European Union border crisis Brazilian protests Colombian tax reform protests Eswatini protests Haitian protests Indian farmers' protests Insulate Britain protests Jersey dispute Libyan peace process Malaysian political crisis Myanmar protests Nicaraguan protests Nigerian protests Persian Gulf crisis Peruvian crisis Romanian political crisis Russian election protests Tigrayan peace process Thai protests Tunisian political crisis United States racial unrest Venezuelan presidential crisis edit section Elections and referendums Recent November 14: Bulgaria, President (1st), National Assembly 14: Argentina, Chamber of Deputies, Senate 18: Tonga, Legislative Assembly 21: Bulgaria, President (2nd) 21: Chile, President (1st), Senate, Chamber of Deputies Upcoming November 28: Honduras, President, National Congress 28: Kyrgyzstan, Supreme Council December 4: The Gambia, President edit section Trials Recently concluded Belarus: Maria Kalesnikava France: Nicolas Sarkozy Myanmar: Danny Fenster Rwanda: Paul Rusesabagina United States: Kyle Rittenhouse, Yanjun Xu, Lev Parnas, R. Kelly, Robert Durst Ongoing Armenia: Serzh Sargsyan Belarus: Sergei Tikhanovsky Canada: Raj Grewal France: Brussels ISIL Indonesia: Nurdin Abdullah Israel: Benjamin Netanyahu Italy: Matteo Salvini Kyrgyzstan: Almazbek Atambayev Malta: Yorgen Fenech Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi Philippines: Leila de Lima Sudan: Omar al-Bashir United States: Elizabeth Holmes, Killing of Ahmaud Arbery Upcoming Indonesia: Azis Syamsuddin, Alex Noerdin Kosovo: Hashim Thaçi, Kadri Veseli Nigeria: Nnamdi Kanu United States: Allen Weisselberg, Ghislaine Maxwell, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Jussie Smollett Vatican City: Giovanni Angelo Becciu ICC: Ali Kushayb edit section Sport Association football 2021–22 UEFA Europa League 2021–22 UEFA Champions league 2021–22 Premier League 2021–22 Bundesliga 2021–22 Serie A 2021–22 La Liga 2021 Copa Libertadores final stages 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification 2020–21 UEFA Nations League 2021 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A 2021 MLS Cup Playoffs American football 2021 NCAA Division I FBS football season 2021 NCAA Division I FCS football season 2021 NFL season Baseball 2021 NPB season Basketball 2021–22 NBA season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Women's Basketball Season Cricket 2021–23 ICC World Test Championship 2020–23 ICC Cricket World Cup Super League 2019–23 ICC Cricket World Cup League 2 2019–22 ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League  Canadian football 2021 CFL season Golf 2020 PGA Tour Champions 2021 Ladies European Tour 2021–22 PGA Tour Ice hockey 2021–22 NHL season 2021–22 IIHF Continental Cup Motorsport 2021 Formula One Championship 2021 Rally Championship 2021 MotoGP 2021 Supercars Championship Rugby union 2021–22 Premiership Rugby 2021–22 United Rugby Championship 2021–22 Top 14 2021 Super Rugby season Tennis 2021 ATP Tour 2021 WTA Tour 2020–21 Davis Cup (Finals) Other sports seasons 2021–22 International cricket season 2021–22 snooker season 2021–22 curling season More details – current sports events edit section Recent deaths November 23: Bill Virdon 23: James Fitz-Allen Mitchell 23: Chun Doo-hwan 22: Doug Jones 18: Peter Buck 18: Mick Rock 18: Ardeshir Zahedi 17: Dave Frishberg 17: Art LaFleur 17: Young Dolph 16: Ri Yong-suk 15: Julio Lugo 15: Clarissa Eden 15: Daulet Sembaev 14: Etel Adnan 14: W. Sterling Cary 13: Sam Huff 13: Wilbur Smith 12: Matthew Festing 11: F. W. de Klerk 11: Glen de Vries 11: Graeme Edge 11: Winter 10: Jun Hong Lu 9: Max Cleland 9: Austin Currie 8: Pedro Feliciano 8: Seán FitzPatrick 8: Mahlagha Mallah 8: Abdul Wahab Dalimunthe 7: Dean Stockwell 6: Angelo Mosca 6: Shawn Rhoden 6: Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé 6: Muamer Zukorli? 6: Yukhym Zvyahilsky 5: Marília Mendonça 4: Ruth Ann Minner 4: Lionel Blair 3: Georgie Dann 2: Sabah Fakhri 1: Aaron Beck October 31: Catherine Tizard 30: Jerry Remy 30: Alan Davidson 30: Bert Newton 29: Clément Mouamba 29: Iran Darroudi 29: Ashley Mallett 29: José Antonio González 26: Mort Sahl 26: Walter Smith 26: Roh Tae-woo 25: Fofi Gennimata edit section Ongoing conflicts Africa Angola Cabinda War Cameroon Anglophone Crisis Central African Republic Civil War Chad Insurgency in Northern Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Kivu conflict Allied Democratic Forces insurgency Ituri conflict Lord's Resistance Army insurgency Kamwina Nsapu rebellion Ethiopia Tigray War (spillover) Oromo conflict Ethiopia and Sudan Sudanese–Ethiopian clashes Ghana Western Togoland Rebellion Maghreb and Sahel regions Maghreb insurgency Mali Mali War Mozambique Insurgency in Cabo Delgado Nigeria Boko Haram insurgency (incl. Lake Chad region) Communal conflicts in Nigeria Senegal Casamance conflict Somalia Civil war South Sudan Ethnic violence in South Sudan Sudan War in Darfur South Kordofan conflict Sudanese nomadic conflicts (incl. South Sudan) Tunisia ISIL insurgency in Tunisia Western Sahara Western Sahara conflict 2020–2021 Western Saharan clashes Americas Colombia Colombian conflict Mexico Mexican drug war Peru Internal conflict in Peru Paraguay Insurgency in Paraguay Asia-Pacific Afghanistan Panjshir conflict Islamic State–Taliban conflict India Insurgency in Northeast India Assam separatist movements Insurgency in Manipur Ethnic conflict in Nagaland Khalistan movement Naxalite–Maoist insurgency India and Pakistan Kashmir conflict Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines Moro conflict Cross border attacks in Sabah Indonesia Papua conflict Myanmar Internal conflict in Myanmar Kachin conflict Karen conflict Rohingya conflict Pakistan Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Insurgency in Balochistan Philippines Communist rebellion Philippine drug war Thailand South Thailand insurgency Europe Armenia and Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Ukraine War in Donbas Russo-Ukrainian War Ireland and the UK Dissident Irish republican campaign Turkey Kurdish–Turkish conflict Global War on terror Middle East Egypt Sinai insurgency Iran and the Persian Gulf Iran–Israel proxy conflict Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict Sistan and Baluchestan insurgency Arab separatism in Khuzestan Kurdish separatism in Iran Iraq Iraqi conflict American-led intervention in Iraq Iranian intervention in Iraq Iraq and Syria (map) International military intervention against ISIL Israel and Gaza Israel and Syria Israeli-Syrian border conflict Israeli-Syrian ceasefire line incidents Syria American-led intervention in Syria Russian military intervention in the Syrian civil war Turkish occupation of northern Syria Yemen and Saudi Arabia Yemeni Civil War Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen Houthi–Saudi Arabian conflict Further information: List of ongoing armed conflicts edit section 2021 events and developments by topic Arts Architecture – Animation – Anime – Comics – Film (Horror, Science fiction) – Home video – Literature – Music (Classical, Country, Hip hop, Latin, Metal, Rock, UK, US) – Radio – Television (UK, US, Italy, Scotland) – Video games Politics and government Elections – International leaders – Sovereign states – Sovereign state leaders – Territorial governors Science and technology Archaeology – Biotechnology – Computing – Palaeontology – Quantum computing and communication – Senescence research – Sustainable energy research – Space/Astronomy – Spaceflight Environment and environmental sciences Birding/Ornithology – Climate change Transportation Aviation – Rail transport By place Afghanistan – Albania – Algeria – Andorra – Angola – Antarctica – Argentina – Armenia – Australia – Austria – Azerbaijan – Bangladesh – The Bahamas – Bahrain – Barbados – Belarus – Belgium – Benin – Bhutan – Bolivia – Bosnia and Herzegovina – Botswana – Brazil – Bulgaria – Burkina Faso – Burundi – Cambodia – Cameroon – Canada – Cape Verde – Central African Republic – Chad – Chile – China – Colombia – Costa Rica – Comoros – Croatia – Cuba – Cyprus – Czech Republic – Denmark – Ecuador – Egypt – El Salvador – Eritrea – Estonia – Ethiopia – European Union – Eswatini – Fiji – Finland – France – Gabon – Georgia – Germany – Ghana – Greece – Guatemala – Guinea – Guinea-Bissau – Guyana – Haiti – Honduras – Hong Kong – Hungary – Iceland – India – Indonesia – Iran – Iraq – Ireland – Israel – Italy – Ivory Coast – Japan – Jordan – Kazakhstan – Kenya – Kiribati – Kosovo – Kuwait – Kyrgyzstan – Laos – Latvia – Lebanon – Lesotho – Liberia – Libya – Lithuania – Luxembourg – Macau – Madagascar – Marshall Islands – Malawi – Malaysia – Mali – Malta – Mauritania – Mexico – Micronesia – Moldova – Mongolia – Montenegro – Morocco – Mozambique – Myanmar – Nauru – Namibia – Nepal – Netherlands – New Zealand – Nicaragua – Niger – Nigeria – North Korea – North Macedonia – Norway – Oman – Pakistan – Palau – Palestine – Panama – Papua New Guinea – Paraguay – Peru – Philippines – Poland – Portugal – Qatar – Romania – Russia – Rwanda – Samoa – Saudi Arabia – Senegal – Serbia – Seychelles – Singapore – Slovakia – Slovenia – Somalia – South Africa – Solomon Islands – South Korea – South Sudan – Spain – Sri Lanka – Sudan – Sweden – Switzerland – Syria – Taiwan – Tajikistan – Tanzania – Thailand – Togo – Tonga – Tunisia – Turkey – Turkmenistan – Tuvalu – Uganda – Ukraine – United Arab Emirates – United Kingdom – United States – Uruguay – Uzbekistan – Vanuatu – Venezuela – Vietnam – Yemen – Zambia – Zimbabwe Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments – Disestablishments Works and introductions categories Works – Introductions – Works entering the public domain Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2021. ...more edit section v t e Events by month 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2001 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2000 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1999 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1998 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1997 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1996 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1995 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1994 January February March April May June July August September October November December Portal:Current events Calendars Content listings Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured content Good articles Spoken articles Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Current_events&oldid=1054047874" Categories: All portals 2021 by day Current events portal 2021 Current events History portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages protected against vandalism Portals with triaged subpages from October 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Ænglisc ??????? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????? Banjar Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ??????? Bikol Central Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Dansk ?????? ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? IsiZulu Íslenska Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Li Niha Limburgs Magyar ?????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau ?????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Nederlands ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ????????? Piemontèis Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? ??? ?????????? ???? Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zeêuws ?? Dagbanli Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 19:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events Portal:Current events - Wikipedia Portal:Current events From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (October 2020) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events Edit instructions Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths Topics in the news Magdalena Andersson Magdalena Andersson (pictured) resigns shortly after being elected as the first female prime minister of Sweden. At least 46 people are killed in a bus crash near Bosnek, Bulgaria. Abdalla Hamdok is reinstated as Prime Minister of Sudan in an agreement following the October coup. In rallying, Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia win the World Championship, and Toyota takes the manufacturers' title. Ongoing: COVID-19 pandemic Recent deaths: Bill Virdon Peter Buck Doug Jones Cedric Robinson David Longdon Jay Last Nominate an article November 24, 2021 (2021-11-24) (Wednesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Tigray War TDF–OLA joint offensive Ethiopian prime minister Abiy Ahmed joins ENDF troops on the frontline to fight advancing rebel forces, transferring his day-to-day duties to deputy prime minister Demeke Mekonnen. (The Independent) Russo-Ukrainian War British foreign secretary Liz Truss warns Russia that any attack on Ukraine would be a "grave mistake", and that the UK is working closely with its NATO allies to provide support to Ukraine. (Reuters) Ukraine launches a "special operation" on the Belarusian border involving troops from the National Guard, police, armed forces, including anti-tank and airborne units, and other reserves amid fears of a migrant crisis and Russian military build-up on its borders. (RFE/RL) Anglophone Crisis Gunmen open fire at a school in Ekondo-Titi, Southwest Region, Cameroon, killing three children and a teacher. (AFP via Barron's) Syrian civil war Israel carries out airstrikes in Homs, Syria, killing two civilians and injuring six soldiers and a third civilian. (Al Jazeera) Disasters and accidents November 2021 English Channel disaster Thirty-one people drown after a boat carrying migrants sinks in the English Channel near Calais. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia Travel during the COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Singapore, COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia Singapore and Malaysia agree to the opening of a second quarantine-free vaccinated travel lane (VTL) through the Johor–Singapore Causeway beginning on 29 November 2021 using designated bus lanes, marking the reopening of the land border between the two countries. (CNA) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, COVID-19 drug development It is announced that the Merck & Co. antiviral drug molnupiravir will be available to Philippine patients after an agreement was signed between the Office of the Vice President of the Philippines and a local health care provider after the Food and Drug Administration gave a compassionate special permit for the drug. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 4,116 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 425,065. (CNA) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 25,864 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (The Washington Post) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 12,637 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1.045 million. (Thomson Reuters Foundation) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Netherlands reimposes mandatory 1.5 m (4 ft 11 in) social distancing measures in a place where COVID passports are not required amid persistently high number of COVID-19 cases. (Euronews) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovakia The Slovak government declares a 90-day state of emergency and will impose a two-week lockdown for entire population beginning tomorrow that will close non-essential shops and restaurants and limits people's movement to specific reasons as the country reports a record 10,315 new cases in the past 24 hours. (Politico.eu) COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada grants full approval of the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine, making Canada the first country to fully approve its single-dose vaccine. (The Hill) International relations Ethiopia–Ireland relations The Irish Department of Foreign Affairs advises all Irish citizens to leave Ethiopia immediately, due to the ongoing conflict. (Raidió Teilifís Éireann) Law and crime Murder of Ahmaud Arbery The three men who killed Ahmaud Arbery in Brunswick in Glynn County, Georgia, United States, in February 2020 are found guilty of murder and aggravated assault. (BBC) Protesters take to the streets in Honiara, Solomon Islands, calling for the resignation of incumbent prime minister Manasseh Sogavare. A building within the Parliament complex is set on fire as protesters proceed to engage in looting and arson while law enforcement personnel fire tear gas into crowds. (RNZ) (RNZ) Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Australia designates the entire Lebanese Shia militant group Hezbollah and the neo-Nazi paramilitary group The Base as terrorist organisations. (The Guardian) Politics and elections Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) November 23, 2021 (2021-11-23) (Tuesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks War in Donbas, Russo-Ukrainian War Ukraine warns of "combat preparedness" of separatist forces in eastern Ukraine as the Russian military presence on the border increases, warning of a potential new conflict. The separatists began mobilization of reservists yesterday. (Reuters) Arts and culture Artefacts from the Battle of Magdala in 1868 are returned to Ethiopia by the United Kingdom. (WION) Business and economy 2018–2021 Turkish currency and debt crisis The Turkish lira falls to an all-time low of 13.44 to the U.S. dollar. The crash was primarily caused by president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an's defence of the Central Bank's continued interest rate cuts amid soaring inflation. (CNBC) Disasters and accidents 2021 Bulgaria bus crash Forty-six people are killed and seven more are injured when a bus carrying North Macedonian tourists returning from Istanbul crashes and catches fire near Bosnek, Pernik Province, Bulgaria. (The New York Times) Two people are killed and 16 others are injured by an explosion at an EDePro rocket engine plant near Belgrade, Serbia. (7 News) Six people are dead and ten others are missing after the ferry they were travelling on capsizes in Kinniya, Sri Lanka. (ABC News Australia) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Switzerland COVID-19 vaccination in Switzerland Swissmedic approves the extension of booster doses of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine to people over the age of 16 years as well as high-risk people over the age of 12 years. (The Times of India) COVID-19 drug development The Swiss government signs a deal to reserve 8,640 doses of Merck & Co.'s antiviral drug molnupiravir beginning in January. (Reuters) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia Australia surpasses 200,000 cases of COVID-19. (Yahoo! News) Law and crime 2021 Waukesha Christmas parade attack An 8-year-old boy, injured during a Christmas-parade car rampage in Waukesha, Wisconsin, dies, bringing the death toll to six. Several of the sixty-two injured still remain in critical condition. (CNN) The suspect, 39-year-old Darrell Brooks, has been charged with six counts of first-degree intentional homicide, and the bail set at $5 million. (France 24) Colombian peace process United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres arrives in Colombia to commemorate the fifth year of the signing of the peace deal between the government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. (MercoPress) The Biden administration announces the delisting of the former FARC rebel group from the United States Department of State list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations where it had been listed since 1997. (Reuters) Sines v. Kessler A U.S. federal jury finds the organizers of 2017's Unite the Right rally, which includes white supremacists Richard B. Spencer, Jason Kessler, and Christopher Cantwell, liable for the violence that occurred and are ordered to pay US$26 million to nine individuals that suffered "physical and emotional damages". However, the jury was deadlocked on whether to convict on two federal conspiracy charges. (DW) (CNN) November 22, 2021 (2021-11-22) (Monday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Tigray War; Oromo conflict TDF–OLA joint offensive Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed, a former soldier, announces that he will lead his country's army from the battlefront beginning tomorrow. (The Washington Post) Insurgency in the Maghreb Gunmen open fire at a security post in Sanmatenga, Burkina Faso, killing ten civilians and nine gendarmes. Another person is injured and an healthcare center has been burned. (The Washington Post) Business and economy 2021 United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Bulb Energy, which supplies 1.7 million customers in the United Kingdom, collapses into administration, becoming the largest energy supplier to have ever collapsed. The company will also be the first energy supplier to be placed under "special administration", which means that the company will be run by the government regulator Ofgem. (The Guardian) Disasters and accidents Nine people die in a fire in a nursing home in the village of Royak, Dalgopol Municipality, Bulgaria. (Reuters) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria enters its fourth full nationwide lockdown that prohibits people from leaving their home except for specific reasons, while allowing schools to remain open, in order to reduce the number of new COVID-19 cases. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in France Prime Minister Jean Castex tests positive for COVID-19. (Reuters) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greece begins to implement measures that ban people who are unvaccinated or who have not recovered from COVID-19 from entering indoor public places and also mandates the wearing of masks in all workplaces in order to reduce the spread of COVID-19. (Ekathimerini) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovakia Slovakia imposes a lockdown for those who are unvaccinated against COVID-19, which prevents them from entering non-essential shops. Slovakia is currently experiencing one of the world's highest infection rates. (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Israel, COVID-19 vaccination in Israel Israel begins administering the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (The Times of Israel) COVID-19 pandemic in Singapore Singapore partially eases its social gathering restrictions and will allow up to five vaccinated people to dine in at food and drink establishments, hawker centres, and coffee shops as the country moves to the endemic phase due to a decrease in the number of new COVID-19 cases. (Singapore Business Report) COVID-19 pandemic in Kenya The Kenyan government approves a measure requiring people to present proof of vaccination in order to enter businesses, restaurants and government offices. This is also to encourage vaccination in a country where only 5% of the population is vaccinated. (The New York Times) International relations Bulgaria–United States relations The United States expresses a "deep concern" over Bulgarian President Rumen Radev's remarks, where he referred to Crimea as "Russian". Radev has expressed his views of maintaining "pragmatic ties" with Russia. The statement by the United States comes after Ukraine summoned the Bulgarian ambassador to Kyiv three days ago. (RFE/RL) Politics and elections Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) (Sunday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks 2021 Jerusalem shooting A Hamas gunman opens fire in the alleyways of Jerusalem's Old City, killing an Israeli man and wounding three others, before being shot and killed by Israeli forces. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Russia, COVID-19 vaccination in Russia President Vladimir Putin receives his booster dose of the Sputnik Light COVID-19 vaccine. (The Hill) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovenia Slovenia surpasses 400,000 cases of COVID-19. (UrduPoint) COVID-19 pandemic in Guadeloupe, Social impact of the COVID-19 pandemic It is announced that France will deploy dozens of gendarmerie to Guadeloupe following occurrences of rioting and looting in the archipelago over COVID-19 measures. At least 31 people were arrested overnight. Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin says that "the first message is that the state will stand firm". (Al Jazeera) COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia Malaysia surpasses 30,000 deaths from COVID-19. (Malay Mail) Law and crime 2021 Waukesha Christmas parade attack Five people are killed and over 40 injured by a hit and run driver who drove through an early Christmas parade in Waukesha, Wisconsin, United States. A person of interest is in custody. (ABC News) Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgian police fire tear gas and water cannons after violence broke out at the end of a mass demonstration in Brussels that involved 35,000 people against tougher COVID-19-related measures. (The Independent) The Taliban issues new guidelines for television broadcasts, mandating that female presenters and journalists wear Islamic coverings, banning entertainment considered blasphemous or insulting to Afghans, and prohibiting films that promote foreign cultural values, among others. (BBC News) Politics and elections 2021 Chilean general election Chileans go to the polls to elect their new president, who will succeed outgoing president Sebastián Piñera. (Reuters) Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) Aftermath of the October 2021 Sudanese coup d'état Abdalla Hamdok is reinstated as Prime Minister of Sudan following a political agreement with Abdel Fattah al-Burhan. (BBC News) Sports 2021 World Rally Championship Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia win the 2021 Championship, while Toyota secure the manufacturers' title. November 20, 2021 (2021-11-20) (Saturday) edit history watch Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Hong Kong Hong Kong authorises the usage of the Sinovac CoronaVac vaccine for children between the ages of 3 and 17 years. (The Guardian) COVID-19 pandemic in Iraq Iraq receives 1.2 million doses of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine through the COVAX initiative. (AFP via Barron's) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, COVID-19 community quarantines in the Philippines The Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF) has fully implemented nationwide, the Alert Level System (ALS) formally replacing the previous community quarantine system that had been in place since March 2020. (Rappler) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgium begins to implement mandatory face masks in indoor places and outdoor events. The country is also enforcing teleworking four days a week for all companies until 12 December. (The Brussels Times) COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 22,936 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) Water crisis in Iran, 2016–2021 Iranian protests Thousands of people gather at the Khaju Bridge in Isfahan to protest the government's water and energy policies. (Al Jazeera) Law and crime Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Three people are seriously injured after being shot by police during protests against COVID-19 measures in Rotterdam, Netherlands. Fifty-one people are also arrested, half of whom are less than 18 years old. (Reuters) Politics and elections 2021 Malacca state election Barisan Nasional (BN) retains power, winning 21 out of 28 seats, defeating its rivals Pakatan Harapan (PH) and Perikatan Nasional (PN). (The Straits Times) November 19, 2021 (2021-11-19) (Friday) edit history watch Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The provincial government of British Columbia, Canada, declares a state of emergency in response to ongoing risks from floods and mudslides. Effective immediately until December 1, citizens in affected regions, including the Lower Mainland and Vancouver Island, are limited to 30 litres of diesel and gasoline purchased at fuel stations. Vehicles used for essential services, such as emergency response, commercial transport, and public transit, are exempt from this order and granted unlimited access to cardlock gas stations ordinarily used by the commercial trucking industry. Price gouging at retail gas stations and the resale of fuel is prohibited. Restrictions on non-essential travel along damaged highways are also set in place. (Global News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austrian chancellor Alexander Schallenberg announces a full nationwide lockdown for the entire population starting on 22 November, amid a surge in new COVID-19 cases that has overwhelmed hospitals. Schallenberg also announces that COVID-19 vaccinations will become mandatory as of 1 February 2022. (The Independent) Austria reports a record for the second consecutive day of 15,809 new cases of COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,027,274. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany The southern German state of Bavaria cancels all Christmas markets and imposes a lockdown in all districts that have a seven-day incidence rate of over 1,000 per 100,000 people amid a substantial increase in the number of new COVID-19 cases. However, schools and kindergartens will continue to remain open. (Deutsche Welle) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 11,289 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 998,488. (Budapest Business Journal) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the third consecutive day of 1,254 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 261,589. (Interfax) COVID-19 pandemic in North America COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada approves the usage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (Global News) COVID-19 pandemic in Grenada Argentina officially announces that it will donate 11,000 doses of the Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine to Grenada. (Memo) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, COVID-19 vaccination in the United States The U.S. CDC authorizes the booster dose of either Pfizer or Moderna COVID-19 vaccine for the general public, which means that all adults are eligible to receive their booster dose. (CNBC) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Victoria Restrictions are further eased for fully vaccinated Victorians as 90% of adults are now fully vaccinated. Mask wearing is still required in some indoor spaces and limits remain on daily visitor numbers to care facilities. Additionally, unvaccinated people continue to be banned from entering all non-essential businesses and also from employment in many industries. (The Guardian) International relations Palestine–United Kingdom relations, Israel-United Kingdom relations The United Kingdom outlaws Hamas, the Palestinian militant group which serves as the ruling party of the Gaza Strip, and declares the party as a terrorist group. Previously, only the party's armed wing was outlawed. (Reuters) Law and crime Kenosha unrest shooting Kyle Rittenhouse, who shot three people during the unrest in Kenosha, Wisconsin, United States, in August 2020, is found not guilty on all counts. (NPR) Hundreds of people march in Chicago, New York City and Portland to protest the verdict of the trial. (WCBS-TV) (WBBM-TV) (ABC News) Politics and elections Vice Presidency of Kamala Harris While U.S. President Joe Biden undergoes medical treatment, U.S. Vice President Kamala Harris is transfered presidential power for a short period of time, making her the first female acting president of the United States. (Forbes) Iraqi Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr announces that he is dissolving the Promised Day Brigade, the armed faction loyal to him. Yesterday, al-Sadr said that non-governmental militias should hand in their weapons. (Reuters) November 18, 2021 (2021-11-18) (Thursday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) Arts and culture 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany COVID-19 vaccination in Germany The Standing Committee on Vaccination recommends that a booster dose of an mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine should be given to all adults over the age of 18 years. (Deutsche Welle) Germany reports a record for the second consecutive day of 65,371 new cases of COVID-19. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 15,145 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,011,465. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis announces that beginning on November 22, unvaccinated people will be banned from entering all indoor venues for which they could previously present a negative test result, due to an increase in new COVID-19 cases. Mitsotakis also announces that vaccine passports will expire after seven months for people over the age of 60 years and urges people in this age group to receive a booster dose. (Greek Reporter) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands The Netherlands reports a record for the fourth consecutive day of 23,860 new cases of COVID-19. (Dutch News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the second consecutive day of 1,251 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 260,335. (The Moscow Times) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Laos Laos reports a record 1,041 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 58,798. (Vietnam Plus) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 3,292 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 406,605. (The Korea Herald) A lab in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States, is placed on temporary lockdown by the CDC after several vials labeled "smallpox" are discovered in a freezer. (CBS News) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Belarus suspends electricity supplies to Ukraine, in "accordance with the established procedure for interaction within the framework of contractual relations", according to a statement from the Belarusian Ministry of Energy. (Ukranews) Law and crime At the Birmingham Crown Court in England, Zephaniah McLeod is sentenced to at least 21 years imprisonment for manslaughter and four counts of attempted murder after killing one person and wounding seven others during a 90-minute stabbing spree in September 2020. (BBC News) The New York Supreme Court vacates the convictions of Muhammad Abdul Aziz (formerly Norman 3X Butler) and the late Khalil Islam (formerly Thomas 15X Johnson) for the 1965 assassination of Malcolm X. The two men were convicted alongside Thomas Hagan (formerly Talmadge Hayer) in 1966. An investigation led by Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr. discovered that the FBI and the NYPD had withheld evidence that would have acquitted Aziz and Islam. (The New York Times) Politics and elections 2021 Tongan general election Tongans go to the polls to elect their new government. (RNZ) More November 2021 events... Time: 22:02 UTC|Day: 24 November ?November 2021? S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 More November 2021 events...    About this page Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia Ongoing events Disasters Climate crisis COVID-19 pandemic 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak 2021 Atlantic hurricane season 2021 Pacific typhoon season Madagascar food crisis Water crisis in Iran Yemeni famine 2021 La Palma eruption Economic 2020–2021 global chip shortage 2021 global supply chain crisis COVID-19 recession Lebanese liquidity crisis Pandora Papers leak Sri Lankan economic and food crisis Turkish currency and debt crisis United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Politics Belarus?European Union border crisis Brazilian protests Colombian tax reform protests Eswatini protests Haitian protests Indian farmers' protests Insulate Britain protests Jersey dispute Libyan peace process Malaysian political crisis Myanmar protests Nicaraguan protests Nigerian protests Persian Gulf crisis Peruvian crisis Romanian political crisis Russian election protests Tigrayan peace process Thai protests Tunisian political crisis United States racial unrest Venezuelan presidential crisis edit section Elections and referendums Recent November 14: Bulgaria, President (1st), National Assembly 14: Argentina, Chamber of Deputies, Senate 18: Tonga, Legislative Assembly 21: Bulgaria, President (2nd) 21: Chile, President (1st), Senate, Chamber of Deputies Upcoming November 28: Honduras, President, National Congress 28: Kyrgyzstan, Supreme Council December 4: The Gambia, President edit section Trials Recently concluded Belarus: Maria Kalesnikava France: Nicolas Sarkozy Myanmar: Danny Fenster Rwanda: Paul Rusesabagina United States: Kyle Rittenhouse, Yanjun Xu, Lev Parnas, R. Kelly, Robert Durst Ongoing Armenia: Serzh Sargsyan Belarus: Sergei Tikhanovsky Canada: Raj Grewal France: Brussels ISIL Indonesia: Nurdin Abdullah Israel: Benjamin Netanyahu Italy: Matteo Salvini Kyrgyzstan: Almazbek Atambayev Malta: Yorgen Fenech Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi Philippines: Leila de Lima Sudan: Omar al-Bashir United States: Elizabeth Holmes, Killing of Ahmaud Arbery Upcoming Indonesia: Azis Syamsuddin, Alex Noerdin Kosovo: Hashim Thaçi, Kadri Veseli Nigeria: Nnamdi Kanu United States: Allen Weisselberg, Ghislaine Maxwell, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Jussie Smollett Vatican City: Giovanni Angelo Becciu ICC: Ali Kushayb edit section Sport Association football 2021–22 UEFA Europa League 2021–22 UEFA Champions league 2021–22 Premier League 2021–22 Bundesliga 2021–22 Serie A 2021–22 La Liga 2021 Copa Libertadores final stages 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification 2020–21 UEFA Nations League 2021 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A 2021 MLS Cup Playoffs American football 2021 NCAA Division I FBS football season 2021 NCAA Division I FCS football season 2021 NFL season Baseball 2021 NPB season Basketball 2021–22 NBA season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Women's Basketball Season Cricket 2021–23 ICC World Test Championship 2020–23 ICC Cricket World Cup Super League 2019–23 ICC Cricket World Cup League 2 2019–22 ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League  Canadian football 2021 CFL season Golf 2020 PGA Tour Champions 2021 Ladies European Tour 2021–22 PGA Tour Ice hockey 2021–22 NHL season 2021–22 IIHF Continental Cup Motorsport 2021 Formula One Championship 2021 Rally Championship 2021 MotoGP 2021 Supercars Championship Rugby union 2021–22 Premiership Rugby 2021–22 United Rugby Championship 2021–22 Top 14 2021 Super Rugby season Tennis 2021 ATP Tour 2021 WTA Tour 2020–21 Davis Cup (Finals) Other sports seasons 2021–22 International cricket season 2021–22 snooker season 2021–22 curling season More details – current sports events edit section Recent deaths November 23: Bill Virdon 23: James Fitz-Allen Mitchell 23: Chun Doo-hwan 22: Doug Jones 18: Peter Buck 18: Mick Rock 18: Ardeshir Zahedi 17: Dave Frishberg 17: Art LaFleur 17: Young Dolph 16: Ri Yong-suk 15: Julio Lugo 15: Clarissa Eden 15: Daulet Sembaev 14: Etel Adnan 14: W. Sterling Cary 13: Sam Huff 13: Wilbur Smith 12: Matthew Festing 11: F. W. de Klerk 11: Glen de Vries 11: Graeme Edge 11: Winter 10: Jun Hong Lu 9: Max Cleland 9: Austin Currie 8: Pedro Feliciano 8: Seán FitzPatrick 8: Mahlagha Mallah 8: Abdul Wahab Dalimunthe 7: Dean Stockwell 6: Angelo Mosca 6: Shawn Rhoden 6: Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé 6: Muamer Zukorli? 6: Yukhym Zvyahilsky 5: Marília Mendonça 4: Ruth Ann Minner 4: Lionel Blair 3: Georgie Dann 2: Sabah Fakhri 1: Aaron Beck October 31: Catherine Tizard 30: Jerry Remy 30: Alan Davidson 30: Bert Newton 29: Clément Mouamba 29: Iran Darroudi 29: Ashley Mallett 29: José Antonio González 26: Mort Sahl 26: Walter Smith 26: Roh Tae-woo 25: Fofi Gennimata edit section Ongoing conflicts Africa Angola Cabinda War Cameroon Anglophone Crisis Central African Republic Civil War Chad Insurgency in Northern Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Kivu conflict Allied Democratic Forces insurgency Ituri conflict Lord's Resistance Army insurgency Kamwina Nsapu rebellion Ethiopia Tigray War (spillover) Oromo conflict Ethiopia and Sudan Sudanese–Ethiopian clashes Ghana Western Togoland Rebellion Maghreb and Sahel regions Maghreb insurgency Mali Mali War Mozambique Insurgency in Cabo Delgado Nigeria Boko Haram insurgency (incl. Lake Chad region) Communal conflicts in Nigeria Senegal Casamance conflict Somalia Civil war South Sudan Ethnic violence in South Sudan Sudan War in Darfur South Kordofan conflict Sudanese nomadic conflicts (incl. South Sudan) Tunisia ISIL insurgency in Tunisia Western Sahara Western Sahara conflict 2020–2021 Western Saharan clashes Americas Colombia Colombian conflict Mexico Mexican drug war Peru Internal conflict in Peru Paraguay Insurgency in Paraguay Asia-Pacific Afghanistan Panjshir conflict Islamic State–Taliban conflict India Insurgency in Northeast India Assam separatist movements Insurgency in Manipur Ethnic conflict in Nagaland Khalistan movement Naxalite–Maoist insurgency India and Pakistan Kashmir conflict Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines Moro conflict Cross border attacks in Sabah Indonesia Papua conflict Myanmar Internal conflict in Myanmar Kachin conflict Karen conflict Rohingya conflict Pakistan Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Insurgency in Balochistan Philippines Communist rebellion Philippine drug war Thailand South Thailand insurgency Europe Armenia and Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Ukraine War in Donbas Russo-Ukrainian War Ireland and the UK Dissident Irish republican campaign Turkey Kurdish–Turkish conflict Global War on terror Middle East Egypt Sinai insurgency Iran and the Persian Gulf Iran–Israel proxy conflict Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict Sistan and Baluchestan insurgency Arab separatism in Khuzestan Kurdish separatism in Iran Iraq Iraqi conflict American-led intervention in Iraq Iranian intervention in Iraq Iraq and Syria (map) International military intervention against ISIL Israel and Gaza Israel and Syria Israeli-Syrian border conflict Israeli-Syrian ceasefire line incidents Syria American-led intervention in Syria Russian military intervention in the Syrian civil war Turkish occupation of northern Syria Yemen and Saudi Arabia Yemeni Civil War Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen Houthi–Saudi Arabian conflict Further information: List of ongoing armed conflicts edit section 2021 events and developments by topic Arts Architecture – Animation – Anime – Comics – Film (Horror, Science fiction) – Home video – Literature – Music (Classical, Country, Hip hop, Latin, Metal, Rock, UK, US) – Radio – Television (UK, US, Italy, Scotland) – Video games Politics and government Elections – International leaders – Sovereign states – Sovereign state leaders – Territorial governors Science and technology Archaeology – Biotechnology – Computing – Palaeontology – Quantum computing and communication – Senescence research – Sustainable energy research – Space/Astronomy – Spaceflight Environment and environmental sciences Birding/Ornithology – Climate change Transportation Aviation – Rail transport By place Afghanistan – Albania – Algeria – Andorra – Angola – Antarctica – Argentina – Armenia – Australia – Austria – Azerbaijan – Bangladesh – The Bahamas – Bahrain – Barbados – Belarus – Belgium – Benin – Bhutan – Bolivia – Bosnia and Herzegovina – Botswana – Brazil – Bulgaria – Burkina Faso – Burundi – Cambodia – Cameroon – Canada – Cape Verde – Central African Republic – Chad – Chile – China – Colombia – Costa Rica – Comoros – Croatia – Cuba – Cyprus – Czech Republic – Denmark – Ecuador – Egypt – El Salvador – Eritrea – Estonia – Ethiopia – European Union – Eswatini – Fiji – Finland – France – Gabon – Georgia – Germany – Ghana – Greece – Guatemala – Guinea – Guinea-Bissau – Guyana – Haiti – Honduras – Hong Kong – Hungary – Iceland – India – Indonesia – Iran – Iraq – Ireland – Israel – Italy – Ivory Coast – Japan – Jordan – Kazakhstan – Kenya – Kiribati – Kosovo – Kuwait – Kyrgyzstan – Laos – Latvia – Lebanon – Lesotho – Liberia – Libya – Lithuania – Luxembourg – Macau – Madagascar – Marshall Islands – Malawi – Malaysia – Mali – Malta – Mauritania – Mexico – Micronesia – Moldova – Mongolia – Montenegro – Morocco – Mozambique – Myanmar – Nauru – Namibia – Nepal – Netherlands – New Zealand – Nicaragua – Niger – Nigeria – North Korea – North Macedonia – Norway – Oman – Pakistan – Palau – Palestine – Panama – Papua New Guinea – Paraguay – Peru – Philippines – Poland – Portugal – Qatar – Romania – Russia – Rwanda – Samoa – Saudi Arabia – Senegal – Serbia – Seychelles – Singapore – Slovakia – Slovenia – Somalia – South Africa – Solomon Islands – South Korea – South Sudan – Spain – Sri Lanka – Sudan – Sweden – Switzerland – Syria – Taiwan – Tajikistan – Tanzania – Thailand – Togo – Tonga – Tunisia – Turkey – Turkmenistan – Tuvalu – Uganda – Ukraine – United Arab Emirates – United Kingdom – United States – Uruguay – Uzbekistan – Vanuatu – Venezuela – Vietnam – Yemen – Zambia – Zimbabwe Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments – Disestablishments Works and introductions categories Works – Introductions – Works entering the public domain Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2021. ...more edit section v t e Events by month 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2001 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2000 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1999 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1998 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1997 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1996 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1995 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1994 January February March April May June July August September October November December Portal:Current events Calendars Content listings Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured content Good articles Spoken articles Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Current_events&oldid=1054047874" Categories: All portals 2021 by day Current events portal 2021 Current events History portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages protected against vandalism Portals with triaged subpages from October 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Ænglisc ??????? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????? Banjar Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ??????? Bikol Central Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Dansk ?????? ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? IsiZulu Íslenska Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Li Niha Limburgs Magyar ?????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau ?????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Nederlands ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ????????? Piemontèis Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? ??? ?????????? ???? Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zeêuws ?? Dagbanli Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 19:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events Portal:Current events - Wikipedia Portal:Current events From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (October 2020) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events Edit instructions Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths Topics in the news Magdalena Andersson Magdalena Andersson (pictured) resigns shortly after being elected as the first female prime minister of Sweden. At least 46 people are killed in a bus crash near Bosnek, Bulgaria. Abdalla Hamdok is reinstated as Prime Minister of Sudan in an agreement following the October coup. In rallying, Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia win the World Championship, and Toyota takes the manufacturers' title. Ongoing: COVID-19 pandemic Recent deaths: Bill Virdon Peter Buck Doug Jones Cedric Robinson David Longdon Jay Last Nominate an article November 24, 2021 (2021-11-24) (Wednesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Tigray War TDF–OLA joint offensive Ethiopian prime minister Abiy Ahmed joins ENDF troops on the frontline to fight advancing rebel forces, transferring his day-to-day duties to deputy prime minister Demeke Mekonnen. (The Independent) Russo-Ukrainian War British foreign secretary Liz Truss warns Russia that any attack on Ukraine would be a "grave mistake", and that the UK is working closely with its NATO allies to provide support to Ukraine. (Reuters) Ukraine launches a "special operation" on the Belarusian border involving troops from the National Guard, police, armed forces, including anti-tank and airborne units, and other reserves amid fears of a migrant crisis and Russian military build-up on its borders. (RFE/RL) Anglophone Crisis Gunmen open fire at a school in Ekondo-Titi, Southwest Region, Cameroon, killing three children and a teacher. (AFP via Barron's) Syrian civil war Israel carries out airstrikes in Homs, Syria, killing two civilians and injuring six soldiers and a third civilian. (Al Jazeera) Disasters and accidents November 2021 English Channel disaster Twenty seven people drown after a boat carrying migrants sinks in the English Channel near Calais. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia Travel during the COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Singapore, COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia Singapore and Malaysia agree to the opening of a second quarantine-free vaccinated travel lane (VTL) through the Johor–Singapore Causeway beginning on 29 November 2021 using designated bus lanes, marking the reopening of the land border between the two countries. (CNA) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, COVID-19 drug development It is announced that the Merck & Co. antiviral drug molnupiravir will be available to Philippine patients after an agreement was signed between the Office of the Vice President of the Philippines and a local health care provider after the Food and Drug Administration gave a compassionate special permit for the drug. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 4,116 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 425,065. (CNA) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 25,864 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (The Washington Post) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 12,637 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1.045 million. (Thomson Reuters Foundation) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Netherlands reimposes mandatory 1.5 m (4 ft 11 in) social distancing measures in a place where COVID passports are not required amid persistently high number of COVID-19 cases. (Euronews) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovakia The Slovak government declares a 90-day state of emergency and will impose a two-week lockdown for entire population beginning tomorrow that will close non-essential shops and restaurants and limits people's movement to specific reasons as the country reports a record 10,315 new cases in the past 24 hours. (Politico.eu) COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada grants full approval of the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine, making Canada the first country to fully approve its single-dose vaccine. (The Hill) International relations Ethiopia–Ireland relations The Irish Department of Foreign Affairs advises all Irish citizens to leave Ethiopia immediately, due to the ongoing conflict. (Raidió Teilifís Éireann) Law and crime Murder of Ahmaud Arbery The three men who killed Ahmaud Arbery in Brunswick in Glynn County, Georgia, United States, in February 2020 are found guilty of murder and aggravated assault. (BBC) Protesters take to the streets in Honiara, Solomon Islands, calling for the resignation of incumbent prime minister Manasseh Sogavare. A building within the Parliament complex is set on fire as protesters proceed to engage in looting and arson while law enforcement personnel fire tear gas into crowds. (RNZ) (RNZ) Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Australia designates the entire Lebanese Shia militant group Hezbollah and the neo-Nazi paramilitary group The Base as terrorist organisations. (The Guardian) Politics and elections Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) November 23, 2021 (2021-11-23) (Tuesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks War in Donbas, Russo-Ukrainian War Ukraine warns of "combat preparedness" of separatist forces in eastern Ukraine as the Russian military presence on the border increases, warning of a potential new conflict. The separatists began mobilization of reservists yesterday. (Reuters) Arts and culture Artefacts from the Battle of Magdala in 1868 are returned to Ethiopia by the United Kingdom. (WION) Business and economy 2018–2021 Turkish currency and debt crisis The Turkish lira falls to an all-time low of 13.44 to the U.S. dollar. The crash was primarily caused by president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an's defence of the Central Bank's continued interest rate cuts amid soaring inflation. (CNBC) Disasters and accidents 2021 Bulgaria bus crash Forty-six people are killed and seven more are injured when a bus carrying North Macedonian tourists returning from Istanbul crashes and catches fire near Bosnek, Pernik Province, Bulgaria. (The New York Times) Two people are killed and 16 others are injured by an explosion at an EDePro rocket engine plant near Belgrade, Serbia. (7 News) Six people are dead and ten others are missing after the ferry they were travelling on capsizes in Kinniya, Sri Lanka. (ABC News Australia) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Switzerland COVID-19 vaccination in Switzerland Swissmedic approves the extension of booster doses of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine to people over the age of 16 years as well as high-risk people over the age of 12 years. (The Times of India) COVID-19 drug development The Swiss government signs a deal to reserve 8,640 doses of Merck & Co.'s antiviral drug molnupiravir beginning in January. (Reuters) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia Australia surpasses 200,000 cases of COVID-19. (Yahoo! News) Law and crime 2021 Waukesha Christmas parade attack An 8-year-old boy, injured during a Christmas-parade car rampage in Waukesha, Wisconsin, dies, bringing the death toll to six. Several of the sixty-two injured still remain in critical condition. (CNN) The suspect, 39-year-old Darrell Brooks, has been charged with six counts of first-degree intentional homicide, and the bail set at $5 million. (France 24) Colombian peace process United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres arrives in Colombia to commemorate the fifth year of the signing of the peace deal between the government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. (MercoPress) The Biden administration announces the delisting of the former FARC rebel group from the United States Department of State list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations where it had been listed since 1997. (Reuters) Sines v. Kessler A U.S. federal jury finds the organizers of 2017's Unite the Right rally, which includes white supremacists Richard B. Spencer, Jason Kessler, and Christopher Cantwell, liable for the violence that occurred and are ordered to pay US$26 million to nine individuals that suffered "physical and emotional damages". However, the jury was deadlocked on whether to convict on two federal conspiracy charges. (DW) (CNN) November 22, 2021 (2021-11-22) (Monday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Tigray War; Oromo conflict TDF–OLA joint offensive Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed, a former soldier, announces that he will lead his country's army from the battlefront beginning tomorrow. (The Washington Post) Insurgency in the Maghreb Gunmen open fire at a security post in Sanmatenga, Burkina Faso, killing ten civilians and nine gendarmes. Another person is injured and an healthcare center has been burned. (The Washington Post) Business and economy 2021 United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Bulb Energy, which supplies 1.7 million customers in the United Kingdom, collapses into administration, becoming the largest energy supplier to have ever collapsed. The company will also be the first energy supplier to be placed under "special administration", which means that the company will be run by the government regulator Ofgem. (The Guardian) Disasters and accidents Nine people die in a fire in a nursing home in the village of Royak, Dalgopol Municipality, Bulgaria. (Reuters) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria enters its fourth full nationwide lockdown that prohibits people from leaving their home except for specific reasons, while allowing schools to remain open, in order to reduce the number of new COVID-19 cases. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in France Prime Minister Jean Castex tests positive for COVID-19. (Reuters) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greece begins to implement measures that ban people who are unvaccinated or who have not recovered from COVID-19 from entering indoor public places and also mandates the wearing of masks in all workplaces in order to reduce the spread of COVID-19. (Ekathimerini) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovakia Slovakia imposes a lockdown for those who are unvaccinated against COVID-19, which prevents them from entering non-essential shops. Slovakia is currently experiencing one of the world's highest infection rates. (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Israel, COVID-19 vaccination in Israel Israel begins administering the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (The Times of Israel) COVID-19 pandemic in Singapore Singapore partially eases its social gathering restrictions and will allow up to five vaccinated people to dine in at food and drink establishments, hawker centres, and coffee shops as the country moves to the endemic phase due to a decrease in the number of new COVID-19 cases. (Singapore Business Report) COVID-19 pandemic in Kenya The Kenyan government approves a measure requiring people to present proof of vaccination in order to enter businesses, restaurants and government offices. This is also to encourage vaccination in a country where only 5% of the population is vaccinated. (The New York Times) International relations Bulgaria–United States relations The United States expresses a "deep concern" over Bulgarian President Rumen Radev's remarks, where he referred to Crimea as "Russian". Radev has expressed his views of maintaining "pragmatic ties" with Russia. The statement by the United States comes after Ukraine summoned the Bulgarian ambassador to Kyiv three days ago. (RFE/RL) Politics and elections Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) (Sunday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks 2021 Jerusalem shooting A Hamas gunman opens fire in the alleyways of Jerusalem's Old City, killing an Israeli man and wounding three others, before being shot and killed by Israeli forces. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Russia, COVID-19 vaccination in Russia President Vladimir Putin receives his booster dose of the Sputnik Light COVID-19 vaccine. (The Hill) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovenia Slovenia surpasses 400,000 cases of COVID-19. (UrduPoint) COVID-19 pandemic in Guadeloupe, Social impact of the COVID-19 pandemic It is announced that France will deploy dozens of gendarmerie to Guadeloupe following occurrences of rioting and looting in the archipelago over COVID-19 measures. At least 31 people were arrested overnight. Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin says that "the first message is that the state will stand firm". (Al Jazeera) COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia Malaysia surpasses 30,000 deaths from COVID-19. (Malay Mail) Law and crime 2021 Waukesha Christmas parade attack Five people are killed and over 40 injured by a hit and run driver who drove through an early Christmas parade in Waukesha, Wisconsin, United States. A person of interest is in custody. (ABC News) Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgian police fire tear gas and water cannons after violence broke out at the end of a mass demonstration in Brussels that involved 35,000 people against tougher COVID-19-related measures. (The Independent) The Taliban issues new guidelines for television broadcasts, mandating that female presenters and journalists wear Islamic coverings, banning entertainment considered blasphemous or insulting to Afghans, and prohibiting films that promote foreign cultural values, among others. (BBC News) Politics and elections 2021 Chilean general election Chileans go to the polls to elect their new president, who will succeed outgoing president Sebastián Piñera. (Reuters) Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) Aftermath of the October 2021 Sudanese coup d'état Abdalla Hamdok is reinstated as Prime Minister of Sudan following a political agreement with Abdel Fattah al-Burhan. (BBC News) Sports 2021 World Rally Championship Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia win the 2021 Championship, while Toyota secure the manufacturers' title. November 20, 2021 (2021-11-20) (Saturday) edit history watch Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Hong Kong Hong Kong authorises the usage of the Sinovac CoronaVac vaccine for children between the ages of 3 and 17 years. (The Guardian) COVID-19 pandemic in Iraq Iraq receives 1.2 million doses of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine through the COVAX initiative. (AFP via Barron's) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, COVID-19 community quarantines in the Philippines The Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF) has fully implemented nationwide, the Alert Level System (ALS) formally replacing the previous community quarantine system that had been in place since March 2020. (Rappler) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgium begins to implement mandatory face masks in indoor places and outdoor events. The country is also enforcing teleworking four days a week for all companies until 12 December. (The Brussels Times) COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 22,936 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) Water crisis in Iran, 2016–2021 Iranian protests Thousands of people gather at the Khaju Bridge in Isfahan to protest the government's water and energy policies. (Al Jazeera) Law and crime Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Three people are seriously injured after being shot by police during protests against COVID-19 measures in Rotterdam, Netherlands. Fifty-one people are also arrested, half of whom are less than 18 years old. (Reuters) Politics and elections 2021 Malacca state election Barisan Nasional (BN) retains power, winning 21 out of 28 seats, defeating its rivals Pakatan Harapan (PH) and Perikatan Nasional (PN). (The Straits Times) November 19, 2021 (2021-11-19) (Friday) edit history watch Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The provincial government of British Columbia, Canada, declares a state of emergency in response to ongoing risks from floods and mudslides. Effective immediately until December 1, citizens in affected regions, including the Lower Mainland and Vancouver Island, are limited to 30 litres of diesel and gasoline purchased at fuel stations. Vehicles used for essential services, such as emergency response, commercial transport, and public transit, are exempt from this order and granted unlimited access to cardlock gas stations ordinarily used by the commercial trucking industry. Price gouging at retail gas stations and the resale of fuel is prohibited. Restrictions on non-essential travel along damaged highways are also set in place. (Global News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austrian chancellor Alexander Schallenberg announces a full nationwide lockdown for the entire population starting on 22 November, amid a surge in new COVID-19 cases that has overwhelmed hospitals. Schallenberg also announces that COVID-19 vaccinations will become mandatory as of 1 February 2022. (The Independent) Austria reports a record for the second consecutive day of 15,809 new cases of COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,027,274. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany The southern German state of Bavaria cancels all Christmas markets and imposes a lockdown in all districts that have a seven-day incidence rate of over 1,000 per 100,000 people amid a substantial increase in the number of new COVID-19 cases. However, schools and kindergartens will continue to remain open. (Deutsche Welle) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 11,289 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 998,488. (Budapest Business Journal) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the third consecutive day of 1,254 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 261,589. (Interfax) COVID-19 pandemic in North America COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada approves the usage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (Global News) COVID-19 pandemic in Grenada Argentina officially announces that it will donate 11,000 doses of the Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine to Grenada. (Memo) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, COVID-19 vaccination in the United States The U.S. CDC authorizes the booster dose of either Pfizer or Moderna COVID-19 vaccine for the general public, which means that all adults are eligible to receive their booster dose. (CNBC) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Victoria Restrictions are further eased for fully vaccinated Victorians as 90% of adults are now fully vaccinated. Mask wearing is still required in some indoor spaces and limits remain on daily visitor numbers to care facilities. Additionally, unvaccinated people continue to be banned from entering all non-essential businesses and also from employment in many industries. (The Guardian) International relations Palestine–United Kingdom relations, Israel-United Kingdom relations The United Kingdom outlaws Hamas, the Palestinian militant group which serves as the ruling party of the Gaza Strip, and declares the party as a terrorist group. Previously, only the party's armed wing was outlawed. (Reuters) Law and crime Kenosha unrest shooting Kyle Rittenhouse, who shot three people during the unrest in Kenosha, Wisconsin, United States, in August 2020, is found not guilty on all counts. (NPR) Hundreds of people march in Chicago, New York City and Portland to protest the verdict of the trial. (WCBS-TV) (WBBM-TV) (ABC News) Politics and elections Vice Presidency of Kamala Harris While U.S. President Joe Biden undergoes medical treatment, U.S. Vice President Kamala Harris is transfered presidential power for a short period of time, making her the first female acting president of the United States. (Forbes) Iraqi Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr announces that he is dissolving the Promised Day Brigade, the armed faction loyal to him. Yesterday, al-Sadr said that non-governmental militias should hand in their weapons. (Reuters) November 18, 2021 (2021-11-18) (Thursday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) Arts and culture 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany COVID-19 vaccination in Germany The Standing Committee on Vaccination recommends that a booster dose of an mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine should be given to all adults over the age of 18 years. (Deutsche Welle) Germany reports a record for the second consecutive day of 65,371 new cases of COVID-19. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 15,145 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,011,465. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis announces that beginning on November 22, unvaccinated people will be banned from entering all indoor venues for which they could previously present a negative test result, due to an increase in new COVID-19 cases. Mitsotakis also announces that vaccine passports will expire after seven months for people over the age of 60 years and urges people in this age group to receive a booster dose. (Greek Reporter) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands The Netherlands reports a record for the fourth consecutive day of 23,860 new cases of COVID-19. (Dutch News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the second consecutive day of 1,251 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 260,335. (The Moscow Times) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Laos Laos reports a record 1,041 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 58,798. (Vietnam Plus) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 3,292 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 406,605. (The Korea Herald) A lab in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States, is placed on temporary lockdown by the CDC after several vials labeled "smallpox" are discovered in a freezer. (CBS News) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Belarus suspends electricity supplies to Ukraine, in "accordance with the established procedure for interaction within the framework of contractual relations", according to a statement from the Belarusian Ministry of Energy. (Ukranews) Law and crime At the Birmingham Crown Court in England, Zephaniah McLeod is sentenced to at least 21 years imprisonment for manslaughter and four counts of attempted murder after killing one person and wounding seven others during a 90-minute stabbing spree in September 2020. (BBC News) The New York Supreme Court vacates the convictions of Muhammad Abdul Aziz (formerly Norman 3X Butler) and the late Khalil Islam (formerly Thomas 15X Johnson) for the 1965 assassination of Malcolm X. The two men were convicted alongside Thomas Hagan (formerly Talmadge Hayer) in 1966. An investigation led by Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr. discovered that the FBI and the NYPD had withheld evidence that would have acquitted Aziz and Islam. (The New York Times) Politics and elections 2021 Tongan general election Tongans go to the polls to elect their new government. (RNZ) More November 2021 events... Time: 22:57 UTC|Day: 24 November ?November 2021? S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 More November 2021 events...    About this page Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia Ongoing events Disasters Climate crisis COVID-19 pandemic 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak 2021 Atlantic hurricane season 2021 Pacific typhoon season Madagascar food crisis Water crisis in Iran Yemeni famine 2021 La Palma eruption Economic 2020–2021 global chip shortage 2021 global supply chain crisis COVID-19 recession Lebanese liquidity crisis Pandora Papers leak Sri Lankan economic and food crisis Turkish currency and debt crisis United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Politics Belarus?European Union border crisis Brazilian protests Colombian tax reform protests Eswatini protests Haitian protests Indian farmers' protests Insulate Britain protests Jersey dispute Libyan peace process Malaysian political crisis Myanmar protests Nicaraguan protests Nigerian protests Persian Gulf crisis Peruvian crisis Romanian political crisis Russian election protests Tigrayan peace process Thai protests Tunisian political crisis United States racial unrest Venezuelan presidential crisis edit section Elections and referendums Recent November 14: Bulgaria, President (1st), National Assembly 14: Argentina, Chamber of Deputies, Senate 18: Tonga, Legislative Assembly 21: Bulgaria, President (2nd) 21: Chile, President (1st), Senate, Chamber of Deputies Upcoming November 28: Honduras, President, National Congress 28: Kyrgyzstan, Supreme Council December 4: The Gambia, President edit section Trials Recently concluded Belarus: Maria Kalesnikava France: Nicolas Sarkozy Myanmar: Danny Fenster Rwanda: Paul Rusesabagina United States: Kyle Rittenhouse, Yanjun Xu, Lev Parnas, R. Kelly, Robert Durst Ongoing Armenia: Serzh Sargsyan Belarus: Sergei Tikhanovsky Canada: Raj Grewal France: Brussels ISIL Indonesia: Nurdin Abdullah Israel: Benjamin Netanyahu Italy: Matteo Salvini Kyrgyzstan: Almazbek Atambayev Malta: Yorgen Fenech Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi Philippines: Leila de Lima Sudan: Omar al-Bashir United States: Elizabeth Holmes, Killing of Ahmaud Arbery Upcoming Indonesia: Azis Syamsuddin, Alex Noerdin Kosovo: Hashim Thaçi, Kadri Veseli Nigeria: Nnamdi Kanu United States: Allen Weisselberg, Ghislaine Maxwell, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Jussie Smollett Vatican City: Giovanni Angelo Becciu ICC: Ali Kushayb edit section Sport Association football 2021–22 UEFA Europa League 2021–22 UEFA Champions league 2021–22 Premier League 2021–22 Bundesliga 2021–22 Serie A 2021–22 La Liga 2021 Copa Libertadores final stages 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification 2020–21 UEFA Nations League 2021 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A 2021 MLS Cup Playoffs American football 2021 NCAA Division I FBS football season 2021 NCAA Division I FCS football season 2021 NFL season Baseball 2021 NPB season Basketball 2021–22 NBA season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Women's Basketball Season Cricket 2021–23 ICC World Test Championship 2020–23 ICC Cricket World Cup Super League 2019–23 ICC Cricket World Cup League 2 2019–22 ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League  Canadian football 2021 CFL season Golf 2020 PGA Tour Champions 2021 Ladies European Tour 2021–22 PGA Tour Ice hockey 2021–22 NHL season 2021–22 IIHF Continental Cup Motorsport 2021 Formula One Championship 2021 Rally Championship 2021 MotoGP 2021 Supercars Championship Rugby union 2021–22 Premiership Rugby 2021–22 United Rugby Championship 2021–22 Top 14 2021 Super Rugby season Tennis 2021 ATP Tour 2021 WTA Tour 2020–21 Davis Cup (Finals) Other sports seasons 2021–22 International cricket season 2021–22 snooker season 2021–22 curling season More details – current sports events edit section Recent deaths November 23: Bill Virdon 23: James Fitz-Allen Mitchell 23: Chun Doo-hwan 22: Doug Jones 18: Peter Buck 18: Mick Rock 18: Ardeshir Zahedi 17: Dave Frishberg 17: Art LaFleur 17: Young Dolph 16: Ri Yong-suk 15: Julio Lugo 15: Clarissa Eden 15: Daulet Sembaev 14: Etel Adnan 14: W. Sterling Cary 13: Sam Huff 13: Wilbur Smith 12: Matthew Festing 11: F. W. de Klerk 11: Glen de Vries 11: Graeme Edge 11: Winter 10: Jun Hong Lu 9: Max Cleland 9: Austin Currie 8: Pedro Feliciano 8: Seán FitzPatrick 8: Mahlagha Mallah 8: Abdul Wahab Dalimunthe 7: Dean Stockwell 6: Angelo Mosca 6: Shawn Rhoden 6: Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé 6: Muamer Zukorli? 6: Yukhym Zvyahilsky 5: Marília Mendonça 4: Ruth Ann Minner 4: Lionel Blair 3: Georgie Dann 2: Sabah Fakhri 1: Aaron Beck October 31: Catherine Tizard 30: Jerry Remy 30: Alan Davidson 30: Bert Newton 29: Clément Mouamba 29: Iran Darroudi 29: Ashley Mallett 29: José Antonio González 26: Mort Sahl 26: Walter Smith 26: Roh Tae-woo 25: Fofi Gennimata edit section Ongoing conflicts Africa Angola Cabinda War Cameroon Anglophone Crisis Central African Republic Civil War Chad Insurgency in Northern Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Kivu conflict Allied Democratic Forces insurgency Ituri conflict Lord's Resistance Army insurgency Kamwina Nsapu rebellion Ethiopia Tigray War (spillover) Oromo conflict Ethiopia and Sudan Sudanese–Ethiopian clashes Ghana Western Togoland Rebellion Maghreb and Sahel regions Maghreb insurgency Mali Mali War Mozambique Insurgency in Cabo Delgado Nigeria Boko Haram insurgency (incl. Lake Chad region) Communal conflicts in Nigeria Senegal Casamance conflict Somalia Civil war South Sudan Ethnic violence in South Sudan Sudan War in Darfur South Kordofan conflict Sudanese nomadic conflicts (incl. South Sudan) Tunisia ISIL insurgency in Tunisia Western Sahara Western Sahara conflict 2020–2021 Western Saharan clashes Americas Colombia Colombian conflict Mexico Mexican drug war Peru Internal conflict in Peru Paraguay Insurgency in Paraguay Asia-Pacific Afghanistan Panjshir conflict Islamic State–Taliban conflict India Insurgency in Northeast India Assam separatist movements Insurgency in Manipur Ethnic conflict in Nagaland Khalistan movement Naxalite–Maoist insurgency India and Pakistan Kashmir conflict Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines Moro conflict Cross border attacks in Sabah Indonesia Papua conflict Myanmar Internal conflict in Myanmar Kachin conflict Karen conflict Rohingya conflict Pakistan Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Insurgency in Balochistan Philippines Communist rebellion Philippine drug war Thailand South Thailand insurgency Europe Armenia and Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Ukraine War in Donbas Russo-Ukrainian War Ireland and the UK Dissident Irish republican campaign Turkey Kurdish–Turkish conflict Global War on terror Middle East Egypt Sinai insurgency Iran and the Persian Gulf Iran–Israel proxy conflict Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict Sistan and Baluchestan insurgency Arab separatism in Khuzestan Kurdish separatism in Iran Iraq Iraqi conflict American-led intervention in Iraq Iranian intervention in Iraq Iraq and Syria (map) International military intervention against ISIL Israel and Gaza Israel and Syria Israeli-Syrian border conflict Israeli-Syrian ceasefire line incidents Syria American-led intervention in Syria Russian military intervention in the Syrian civil war Turkish occupation of northern Syria Yemen and Saudi Arabia Yemeni Civil War Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen Houthi–Saudi Arabian conflict Further information: List of ongoing armed conflicts edit section 2021 events and developments by topic Arts Architecture – Animation – Anime – Comics – Film (Horror, Science fiction) – Home video – Literature – Music (Classical, Country, Hip hop, Latin, Metal, Rock, UK, US) – Radio – Television (UK, US, Italy, Scotland) – Video games Politics and government Elections – International leaders – Sovereign states – Sovereign state leaders – Territorial governors Science and technology Archaeology – Biotechnology – Computing – Palaeontology – Quantum computing and communication – Senescence research – Sustainable energy research – Space/Astronomy – Spaceflight Environment and environmental sciences Birding/Ornithology – Climate change Transportation Aviation – Rail transport By place Afghanistan – Albania – Algeria – Andorra – Angola – Antarctica – Argentina – Armenia – Australia – Austria – Azerbaijan – Bangladesh – The Bahamas – Bahrain – Barbados – Belarus – Belgium – Benin – Bhutan – Bolivia – Bosnia and Herzegovina – Botswana – Brazil – Bulgaria – Burkina Faso – Burundi – Cambodia – Cameroon – Canada – Cape Verde – Central African Republic – Chad – Chile – China – Colombia – Costa Rica – Comoros – Croatia – Cuba – Cyprus – Czech Republic – Denmark – Ecuador – Egypt – El Salvador – Eritrea – Estonia – Ethiopia – European Union – Eswatini – Fiji – Finland – France – Gabon – Georgia – Germany – Ghana – Greece – Guatemala – Guinea – Guinea-Bissau – Guyana – Haiti – Honduras – Hong Kong – Hungary – Iceland – India – Indonesia – Iran – Iraq – Ireland – Israel – Italy – Ivory Coast – Japan – Jordan – Kazakhstan – Kenya – Kiribati – Kosovo – Kuwait – Kyrgyzstan – Laos – Latvia – Lebanon – Lesotho – Liberia – Libya – Lithuania – Luxembourg – Macau – Madagascar – Marshall Islands – Malawi – Malaysia – Mali – Malta – Mauritania – Mexico – Micronesia – Moldova – Mongolia – Montenegro – Morocco – Mozambique – Myanmar – Nauru – Namibia – Nepal – Netherlands – New Zealand – Nicaragua – Niger – Nigeria – North Korea – North Macedonia – Norway – Oman – Pakistan – Palau – Palestine – Panama – Papua New Guinea – Paraguay – Peru – Philippines – Poland – Portugal – Qatar – Romania – Russia – Rwanda – Samoa – Saudi Arabia – Senegal – Serbia – Seychelles – Singapore – Slovakia – Slovenia – Somalia – South Africa – Solomon Islands – South Korea – South Sudan – Spain – Sri Lanka – Sudan – Sweden – Switzerland – Syria – Taiwan – Tajikistan – Tanzania – Thailand – Togo – Tonga – Tunisia – Turkey – Turkmenistan – Tuvalu – Uganda – Ukraine – United Arab Emirates – United Kingdom – United States – Uruguay – Uzbekistan – Vanuatu – Venezuela – Vietnam – Yemen – Zambia – Zimbabwe Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments – Disestablishments Works and introductions categories Works – Introductions – Works entering the public domain Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2021. ...more edit section v t e Events by month 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2001 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2000 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1999 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1998 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1997 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1996 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1995 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1994 January February March April May June July August September October November December Portal:Current events Calendars Content listings Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured content Good articles Spoken articles Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Current_events&oldid=1054047874" Categories: All portals 2021 by day Current events portal 2021 Current events History portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages protected against vandalism Portals with triaged subpages from October 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Ænglisc ??????? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????? Banjar Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ??????? Bikol Central Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Dansk ?????? ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? IsiZulu Íslenska Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Li Niha Limburgs Magyar ?????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau ?????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Nederlands ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ????????? Piemontèis Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? ??? ?????????? ???? Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zeêuws ?? Dagbanli Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 19:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Current_events Portal:Current events - Wikipedia Portal:Current events From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Portal maintenance status: (October 2020) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to Current events Edit instructions Worldwide current events Sports events Recent deaths Topics in the news Magdalena Andersson Magdalena Andersson (pictured) resigns shortly after being elected as the first female prime minister of Sweden. At least 46 people are killed in a bus crash near Bosnek, Bulgaria. Abdalla Hamdok is reinstated as Prime Minister of Sudan in an agreement following the October coup. In rallying, Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia win the World Championship, and Toyota takes the manufacturers' title. Ongoing: COVID-19 pandemic Recent deaths: Bill Virdon Peter Buck Doug Jones Cedric Robinson David Longdon Jay Last Nominate an article November 24, 2021 (2021-11-24) (Wednesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Tigray War TDF–OLA joint offensive Ethiopian prime minister Abiy Ahmed joins ENDF troops on the frontline to fight advancing rebel forces, transferring his day-to-day duties to deputy prime minister Demeke Mekonnen. (The Independent) Russo-Ukrainian War British foreign secretary Liz Truss warns Russia that any attack on Ukraine would be a "grave mistake", and that the UK is working closely with its NATO allies to provide support to Ukraine. (Reuters) Ukraine launches a "special operation" on the Belarusian border involving troops from the National Guard, police, armed forces, including anti-tank and airborne units, and other reserves amid fears of a migrant crisis and Russian military build-up on its borders. (RFE/RL) Anglophone Crisis Gunmen open fire at a school in Ekondo-Titi, Southwest Region, Cameroon, killing three children and a teacher. (AFP via Barron's) Syrian civil war Israel carries out airstrikes in Homs, Syria, killing two civilians and injuring six soldiers and a third civilian. (Al Jazeera) Disasters and accidents November 2021 English Channel disaster Thirty-one people drown after a boat carrying migrants sinks in the English Channel near Calais. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia Travel during the COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Singapore, COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia Singapore and Malaysia agree to the opening of a second quarantine-free vaccinated travel lane (VTL) through the Johor–Singapore Causeway beginning on 29 November 2021 using designated bus lanes, marking the reopening of the land border between the two countries. (CNA) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, COVID-19 drug development It is announced that the Merck & Co. antiviral drug molnupiravir will be available to Philippine patients after an agreement was signed between the Office of the Vice President of the Philippines and a local health care provider after the Food and Drug Administration gave a compassionate special permit for the drug. (Philippine Daily Inquirer) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 4,116 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 425,065. (CNA) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 25,864 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (The Washington Post) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 12,637 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1.045 million. (Thomson Reuters Foundation) COVID-19 pandemic in Italy The Italian government signs a decree that would ban those unvaccinated or unrecovered from COVID-19 from entering indoor venues from December 6 until January 15, 2022 and extending the vaccine mandate to teachers, police, and military beginning from December 15. (Reuters) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Netherlands reimposes mandatory 1.5 m (4 ft 11 in) social distancing measures in a place where COVID passports are not required amid persistently high number of COVID-19 cases. (Euronews) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovakia The Slovak government declares a 90-day state of emergency and will impose a two-week lockdown for entire population beginning tomorrow that will close non-essential shops and restaurants and limits people's movement to specific reasons as the country reports a record 10,315 new cases in the past 24 hours. (Politico.eu) COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada grants full approval of the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine, making Canada the first country to fully approve its single-dose vaccine. (The Hill) International relations Ethiopia–Ireland relations The Irish Department of Foreign Affairs advises all Irish citizens to leave Ethiopia immediately, due to the ongoing conflict. (Raidió Teilifís Éireann) Law and crime Murder of Ahmaud Arbery The three men who killed Ahmaud Arbery in Brunswick in Glynn County, Georgia, United States, in February 2020 are found guilty of murder and aggravated assault. (BBC) Protesters take to the streets in Honiara, Solomon Islands, calling for the resignation of incumbent prime minister Manasseh Sogavare. A building within the Parliament complex is set on fire as protesters proceed to engage in looting and arson while law enforcement personnel fire tear gas into crowds. (RNZ) (RNZ) Two allies of Russian opposition leader and activist Alexei Navalny flee Russia, being the latest to do so after many left last September. They are a woman who helped him represent his organization and a lawyer who said that he was under pressure. (Reuters) Australia designates the entire Lebanese Shia militant group Hezbollah and the neo-Nazi paramilitary group The Base as terrorist organisations. (The Guardian) Politics and elections Sweden's Riksdag votes Social Democrat leader Magdalena Andersson to become the new and first female prime minister of Sweden, only for her to resign several hours later. (Radio Sweden) (Reuters) November 23, 2021 (2021-11-23) (Tuesday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks War in Donbas, Russo-Ukrainian War Ukraine warns of "combat preparedness" of separatist forces in eastern Ukraine as the Russian military presence on the border increases, warning of a potential new conflict. The separatists began mobilization of reservists yesterday. (Reuters) Arts and culture Artefacts from the Battle of Magdala in 1868 are returned to Ethiopia by the United Kingdom. (WION) Business and economy 2018–2021 Turkish currency and debt crisis The Turkish lira falls to an all-time low of 13.44 to the U.S. dollar. The crash was primarily caused by president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an's defence of the Central Bank's continued interest rate cuts amid soaring inflation. (CNBC) Disasters and accidents 2021 Bulgaria bus crash Forty-six people are killed and seven more are injured when a bus carrying North Macedonian tourists returning from Istanbul crashes and catches fire near Bosnek, Pernik Province, Bulgaria. (The New York Times) Two people are killed and 16 others are injured by an explosion at an EDePro rocket engine plant near Belgrade, Serbia. (7 News) Six people are dead and ten others are missing after the ferry they were travelling on capsizes in Kinniya, Sri Lanka. (ABC News Australia) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Switzerland COVID-19 vaccination in Switzerland Swissmedic approves the extension of booster doses of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine to people over the age of 16 years as well as high-risk people over the age of 12 years. (The Times of India) COVID-19 drug development The Swiss government signs a deal to reserve 8,640 doses of Merck & Co.'s antiviral drug molnupiravir beginning in January. (Reuters) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia Australia surpasses 200,000 cases of COVID-19. (Yahoo! News) Law and crime 2021 Waukesha Christmas parade attack An 8-year-old boy, injured during a Christmas-parade car rampage in Waukesha, Wisconsin, dies, bringing the death toll to six. Several of the sixty-two injured still remain in critical condition. (CNN) The suspect, 39-year-old Darrell Brooks, has been charged with six counts of first-degree intentional homicide, and the bail set at $5 million. (France 24) Colombian peace process United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres arrives in Colombia to commemorate the fifth year of the signing of the peace deal between the government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. (MercoPress) The Biden administration announces the delisting of the former FARC rebel group from the United States Department of State list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations where it had been listed since 1997. (Reuters) Sines v. Kessler A U.S. federal jury finds the organizers of 2017's Unite the Right rally, which includes white supremacists Richard B. Spencer, Jason Kessler, and Christopher Cantwell, liable for the violence that occurred and are ordered to pay US$26 million to nine individuals that suffered "physical and emotional damages". However, the jury was deadlocked on whether to convict on two federal conspiracy charges. (DW) (CNN) November 22, 2021 (2021-11-22) (Monday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Tigray War; Oromo conflict TDF–OLA joint offensive Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed, a former soldier, announces that he will lead his country's army from the battlefront beginning tomorrow. (The Washington Post) Insurgency in the Maghreb Gunmen open fire at a security post in Sanmatenga, Burkina Faso, killing ten civilians and nine gendarmes. Another person is injured and an healthcare center has been burned. (The Washington Post) Business and economy 2021 United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Bulb Energy, which supplies 1.7 million customers in the United Kingdom, collapses into administration, becoming the largest energy supplier to have ever collapsed. The company will also be the first energy supplier to be placed under "special administration", which means that the company will be run by the government regulator Ofgem. (The Guardian) Disasters and accidents Nine people die in a fire in a nursing home in the village of Royak, Dalgopol Municipality, Bulgaria. (Reuters) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria enters its fourth full nationwide lockdown that prohibits people from leaving their home except for specific reasons, while allowing schools to remain open, in order to reduce the number of new COVID-19 cases. (AP) COVID-19 pandemic in France Prime Minister Jean Castex tests positive for COVID-19. (Reuters) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greece begins to implement measures that ban people who are unvaccinated or who have not recovered from COVID-19 from entering indoor public places and also mandates the wearing of masks in all workplaces in order to reduce the spread of COVID-19. (Ekathimerini) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovakia Slovakia imposes a lockdown for those who are unvaccinated against COVID-19, which prevents them from entering non-essential shops. Slovakia is currently experiencing one of the world's highest infection rates. (Medical Xpress) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Israel, COVID-19 vaccination in Israel Israel begins administering the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (The Times of Israel) COVID-19 pandemic in Singapore Singapore partially eases its social gathering restrictions and will allow up to five vaccinated people to dine in at food and drink establishments, hawker centres, and coffee shops as the country moves to the endemic phase due to a decrease in the number of new COVID-19 cases. (Singapore Business Report) COVID-19 pandemic in Kenya The Kenyan government approves a measure requiring people to present proof of vaccination in order to enter businesses, restaurants and government offices. This is also to encourage vaccination in a country where only 5% of the population is vaccinated. (The New York Times) International relations Bulgaria–United States relations The United States expresses a "deep concern" over Bulgarian President Rumen Radev's remarks, where he referred to Crimea as "Russian". Radev has expressed his views of maintaining "pragmatic ties" with Russia. The statement by the United States comes after Ukraine summoned the Bulgarian ambassador to Kyiv three days ago. (RFE/RL) Politics and elections Aftermath of the 2021 Venezuelan regional elections Opposition leader Juan Guaidó calls for unity and to rebuild the opposition's fragmented strategy, after suffering a heavy loss at the regional elections and losing 20 gubernatorial races to the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela. (Reuters) November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) (Sunday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks 2021 Jerusalem shooting A Hamas gunman opens fire in the alleyways of Jerusalem's Old City, killing an Israeli man and wounding three others, before being shot and killed by Israeli forces. (BBC News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Russia, COVID-19 vaccination in Russia President Vladimir Putin receives his booster dose of the Sputnik Light COVID-19 vaccine. (The Hill) COVID-19 pandemic in Slovenia Slovenia surpasses 400,000 cases of COVID-19. (UrduPoint) COVID-19 pandemic in Guadeloupe, Social impact of the COVID-19 pandemic It is announced that France will deploy dozens of gendarmerie to Guadeloupe following occurrences of rioting and looting in the archipelago over COVID-19 measures. At least 31 people were arrested overnight. Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin says that "the first message is that the state will stand firm". (Al Jazeera) COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia Malaysia surpasses 30,000 deaths from COVID-19. (Malay Mail) Law and crime 2021 Waukesha Christmas parade attack Five people are killed and over 40 injured by a hit and run driver who drove through an early Christmas parade in Waukesha, Wisconsin, United States. A person of interest is in custody. (ABC News) Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgian police fire tear gas and water cannons after violence broke out at the end of a mass demonstration in Brussels that involved 35,000 people against tougher COVID-19-related measures. (The Independent) The Taliban issues new guidelines for television broadcasts, mandating that female presenters and journalists wear Islamic coverings, banning entertainment considered blasphemous or insulting to Afghans, and prohibiting films that promote foreign cultural values, among others. (BBC News) Politics and elections 2021 Chilean general election Chileans go to the polls to elect their new president, who will succeed outgoing president Sebastián Piñera. (Reuters) Far-right populist José Antonio Kast of the Republican Party and former student protest leader Gabriel Boric of the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad qualify for the second round, after winning 27.94% and 25.75% of the vote respectively. The second round will take place on December 19. (Reuters) Aftermath of the October 2021 Sudanese coup d'état Abdalla Hamdok is reinstated as Prime Minister of Sudan following a political agreement with Abdel Fattah al-Burhan. (BBC News) Sports 2021 World Rally Championship Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia win the 2021 Championship, while Toyota secure the manufacturers' title. November 20, 2021 (2021-11-20) (Saturday) edit history watch Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Hong Kong Hong Kong authorises the usage of the Sinovac CoronaVac vaccine for children between the ages of 3 and 17 years. (The Guardian) COVID-19 pandemic in Iraq Iraq receives 1.2 million doses of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine through the COVAX initiative. (AFP via Barron's) COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines, COVID-19 community quarantines in the Philippines The Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF) has fully implemented nationwide, the Alert Level System (ALS) formally replacing the previous community quarantine system that had been in place since March 2020. (Rappler) COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium Belgium begins to implement mandatory face masks in indoor places and outdoor events. The country is also enforcing teleworking four days a week for all companies until 12 December. (The Brussels Times) COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports a record 22,936 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. (ABC News) Water crisis in Iran, 2016–2021 Iranian protests Thousands of people gather at the Khaju Bridge in Isfahan to protest the government's water and energy policies. (Al Jazeera) Law and crime Protests over responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands Three people are seriously injured after being shot by police during protests against COVID-19 measures in Rotterdam, Netherlands. Fifty-one people are also arrested, half of whom are less than 18 years old. (Reuters) Politics and elections 2021 Malacca state election Barisan Nasional (BN) retains power, winning 21 out of 28 seats, defeating its rivals Pakatan Harapan (PH) and Perikatan Nasional (PN). (The Straits Times) November 19, 2021 (2021-11-19) (Friday) edit history watch Disasters and accidents November 2021 Pacific Northwest floods The provincial government of British Columbia, Canada, declares a state of emergency in response to ongoing risks from floods and mudslides. Effective immediately until December 1, citizens in affected regions, including the Lower Mainland and Vancouver Island, are limited to 30 litres of diesel and gasoline purchased at fuel stations. Vehicles used for essential services, such as emergency response, commercial transport, and public transit, are exempt from this order and granted unlimited access to cardlock gas stations ordinarily used by the commercial trucking industry. Price gouging at retail gas stations and the resale of fuel is prohibited. Restrictions on non-essential travel along damaged highways are also set in place. (Global News) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austrian chancellor Alexander Schallenberg announces a full nationwide lockdown for the entire population starting on 22 November, amid a surge in new COVID-19 cases that has overwhelmed hospitals. Schallenberg also announces that COVID-19 vaccinations will become mandatory as of 1 February 2022. (The Independent) Austria reports a record for the second consecutive day of 15,809 new cases of COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,027,274. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Germany The southern German state of Bavaria cancels all Christmas markets and imposes a lockdown in all districts that have a seven-day incidence rate of over 1,000 per 100,000 people amid a substantial increase in the number of new COVID-19 cases. However, schools and kindergartens will continue to remain open. (Deutsche Welle) COVID-19 pandemic in Hungary Hungary reports a record 11,289 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 998,488. (Budapest Business Journal) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the third consecutive day of 1,254 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 261,589. (Interfax) COVID-19 pandemic in North America COVID-19 pandemic in Canada, COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Health Canada approves the usage of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11 years. (Global News) COVID-19 pandemic in Grenada Argentina officially announces that it will donate 11,000 doses of the Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine to Grenada. (Memo) COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, COVID-19 vaccination in the United States The U.S. CDC authorizes the booster dose of either Pfizer or Moderna COVID-19 vaccine for the general public, which means that all adults are eligible to receive their booster dose. (CNBC) COVID-19 pandemic in Australia COVID-19 pandemic in Victoria Restrictions are further eased for fully vaccinated Victorians as 90% of adults are now fully vaccinated. Mask wearing is still required in some indoor spaces and limits remain on daily visitor numbers to care facilities. Additionally, unvaccinated people continue to be banned from entering all non-essential businesses and also from employment in many industries. (The Guardian) International relations Palestine–United Kingdom relations, Israel-United Kingdom relations The United Kingdom outlaws Hamas, the Palestinian militant group which serves as the ruling party of the Gaza Strip, and declares the party as a terrorist group. Previously, only the party's armed wing was outlawed. (Reuters) Law and crime Kenosha unrest shooting Kyle Rittenhouse, who shot three people during the unrest in Kenosha, Wisconsin, United States, in August 2020, is found not guilty on all counts. (NPR) Hundreds of people march in Chicago, New York City and Portland to protest the verdict of the trial. (WCBS-TV) (WBBM-TV) (ABC News) Politics and elections Vice Presidency of Kamala Harris While U.S. President Joe Biden undergoes medical treatment, U.S. Vice President Kamala Harris is transfered presidential power for a short period of time, making her the first female acting president of the United States. (Forbes) Iraqi Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr announces that he is dissolving the Promised Day Brigade, the armed faction loyal to him. Yesterday, al-Sadr said that non-governmental militias should hand in their weapons. (Reuters) November 18, 2021 (2021-11-18) (Thursday) edit history watch Armed conflicts and attacks Aftermath of the October 2021 Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan protests Saad Hussain Rizvi, the leader of the far-right Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, is released from prison under a deal to end weeks of protests by his followers, which resulted in the deaths of dozens of people. (Reuters) Arts and culture 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards The 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards are held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. Colombian singer Camilo was the most awarded artist with four wins. (Billboard) Health and environment COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Europe COVID-19 pandemic in Germany COVID-19 vaccination in Germany The Standing Committee on Vaccination recommends that a booster dose of an mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine should be given to all adults over the age of 18 years. (Deutsche Welle) Germany reports a record for the second consecutive day of 65,371 new cases of COVID-19. (Anadolu Agency) COVID-19 pandemic in Austria Austria reports a record 15,145 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 1,011,465. (Kronen Zeitung) COVID-19 pandemic in Greece Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis announces that beginning on November 22, unvaccinated people will be banned from entering all indoor venues for which they could previously present a negative test result, due to an increase in new COVID-19 cases. Mitsotakis also announces that vaccine passports will expire after seven months for people over the age of 60 years and urges people in this age group to receive a booster dose. (Greek Reporter) COVID-19 pandemic in the Netherlands The Netherlands reports a record for the fourth consecutive day of 23,860 new cases of COVID-19. (Dutch News) COVID-19 pandemic in Russia Russia reports a record for the second consecutive day of 1,251 deaths from COVID-19, thereby bringing the nationwide death toll to 260,335. (The Moscow Times) COVID-19 pandemic in Asia COVID-19 pandemic in Laos Laos reports a record 1,041 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 58,798. (Vietnam Plus) COVID-19 pandemic in South Korea South Korea reports a record 3,292 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours, thereby bringing the nationwide total of confirmed cases to 406,605. (The Korea Herald) A lab in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States, is placed on temporary lockdown by the CDC after several vials labeled "smallpox" are discovered in a freezer. (CBS News) International relations 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis Belarus suspends electricity supplies to Ukraine, in "accordance with the established procedure for interaction within the framework of contractual relations", according to a statement from the Belarusian Ministry of Energy. (Ukranews) Law and crime At the Birmingham Crown Court in England, Zephaniah McLeod is sentenced to at least 21 years imprisonment for manslaughter and four counts of attempted murder after killing one person and wounding seven others during a 90-minute stabbing spree in September 2020. (BBC News) The New York Supreme Court vacates the convictions of Muhammad Abdul Aziz (formerly Norman 3X Butler) and the late Khalil Islam (formerly Thomas 15X Johnson) for the 1965 assassination of Malcolm X. The two men were convicted alongside Thomas Hagan (formerly Talmadge Hayer) in 1966. An investigation led by Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr. discovered that the FBI and the NYPD had withheld evidence that would have acquitted Aziz and Islam. (The New York Times) Politics and elections 2021 Tongan general election Tongans go to the polls to elect their new government. (RNZ) More November 2021 events... Time: 23:30 UTC|Day: 24 November ?November 2021? S M T W T F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 More November 2021 events...    About this page Report a dispute • News about Wikipedia Ongoing events Disasters Climate crisis COVID-19 pandemic 2020–21 H5N8 outbreak 2021 Atlantic hurricane season 2021 Pacific typhoon season Madagascar food crisis Water crisis in Iran Yemeni famine 2021 La Palma eruption Economic 2020–2021 global chip shortage 2021 global supply chain crisis COVID-19 recession Lebanese liquidity crisis Pandora Papers leak Sri Lankan economic and food crisis Turkish currency and debt crisis United Kingdom natural gas supplier crisis Politics Belarus?European Union border crisis Brazilian protests Colombian tax reform protests Eswatini protests Haitian protests Indian farmers' protests Insulate Britain protests Jersey dispute Libyan peace process Malaysian political crisis Myanmar protests Nicaraguan protests Nigerian protests Persian Gulf crisis Peruvian crisis Romanian political crisis Russian election protests Tigrayan peace process Thai protests Tunisian political crisis United States racial unrest Venezuelan presidential crisis edit section Elections and referendums Recent November 14: Bulgaria, President (1st), National Assembly 14: Argentina, Chamber of Deputies, Senate 18: Tonga, Legislative Assembly 21: Bulgaria, President (2nd) 21: Chile, President (1st), Senate, Chamber of Deputies Upcoming November 28: Honduras, President, National Congress 28: Kyrgyzstan, Supreme Council December 4: The Gambia, President edit section Trials Recently concluded Belarus: Maria Kalesnikava France: Nicolas Sarkozy Myanmar: Danny Fenster Rwanda: Paul Rusesabagina United States: Kyle Rittenhouse, Yanjun Xu, Lev Parnas, R. Kelly, Robert Durst Ongoing Armenia: Serzh Sargsyan Belarus: Sergei Tikhanovsky Canada: Raj Grewal France: Brussels ISIL Indonesia: Nurdin Abdullah Israel: Benjamin Netanyahu Italy: Matteo Salvini Kyrgyzstan: Almazbek Atambayev Malta: Yorgen Fenech Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi Philippines: Leila de Lima Sudan: Omar al-Bashir United States: Elizabeth Holmes, Killing of Ahmaud Arbery Upcoming Indonesia: Azis Syamsuddin, Alex Noerdin Kosovo: Hashim Thaçi, Kadri Veseli Nigeria: Nnamdi Kanu United States: Allen Weisselberg, Ghislaine Maxwell, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Jussie Smollett Vatican City: Giovanni Angelo Becciu ICC: Ali Kushayb edit section Sport Association football 2021–22 UEFA Europa League 2021–22 UEFA Champions league 2021–22 Premier League 2021–22 Bundesliga 2021–22 Serie A 2021–22 La Liga 2021 Copa Libertadores final stages 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification 2020–21 UEFA Nations League 2021 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A 2021 MLS Cup Playoffs American football 2021 NCAA Division I FBS football season 2021 NCAA Division I FCS football season 2021 NFL season Baseball 2021 NPB season Basketball 2021–22 NBA season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Season 2021-22 NCAA Division I Women's Basketball Season Cricket 2021–23 ICC World Test Championship 2020–23 ICC Cricket World Cup Super League 2019–23 ICC Cricket World Cup League 2 2019–22 ICC Cricket World Cup Challenge League  Canadian football 2021 CFL season Golf 2020 PGA Tour Champions 2021 Ladies European Tour 2021–22 PGA Tour Ice hockey 2021–22 NHL season 2021–22 IIHF Continental Cup Motorsport 2021 Formula One Championship 2021 Rally Championship 2021 MotoGP 2021 Supercars Championship Rugby union 2021–22 Premiership Rugby 2021–22 United Rugby Championship 2021–22 Top 14 2021 Super Rugby season Tennis 2021 ATP Tour 2021 WTA Tour 2020–21 Davis Cup (Finals) Other sports seasons 2021–22 International cricket season 2021–22 snooker season 2021–22 curling season More details – current sports events edit section Recent deaths November 23: Bill Virdon 23: James Fitz-Allen Mitchell 23: Chun Doo-hwan 22: Doug Jones 18: Peter Buck 18: Mick Rock 18: Ardeshir Zahedi 17: Dave Frishberg 17: Art LaFleur 17: Young Dolph 16: Ri Yong-suk 15: Julio Lugo 15: Clarissa Eden 15: Daulet Sembaev 14: Etel Adnan 14: W. Sterling Cary 13: Sam Huff 13: Wilbur Smith 12: Matthew Festing 11: F. W. de Klerk 11: Glen de Vries 11: Graeme Edge 11: Winter 10: Jun Hong Lu 9: Max Cleland 9: Austin Currie 8: Pedro Feliciano 8: Seán FitzPatrick 8: Mahlagha Mallah 8: Abdul Wahab Dalimunthe 7: Dean Stockwell 6: Angelo Mosca 6: Shawn Rhoden 6: Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé 6: Muamer Zukorli? 6: Yukhym Zvyahilsky 5: Marília Mendonça 4: Ruth Ann Minner 4: Lionel Blair 3: Georgie Dann 2: Sabah Fakhri 1: Aaron Beck October 31: Catherine Tizard 30: Jerry Remy 30: Alan Davidson 30: Bert Newton 29: Clément Mouamba 29: Iran Darroudi 29: Ashley Mallett 29: José Antonio González 26: Mort Sahl 26: Walter Smith 26: Roh Tae-woo 25: Fofi Gennimata edit section Ongoing conflicts Africa Angola Cabinda War Cameroon Anglophone Crisis Central African Republic Civil War Chad Insurgency in Northern Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Kivu conflict Allied Democratic Forces insurgency Ituri conflict Lord's Resistance Army insurgency Kamwina Nsapu rebellion Ethiopia Tigray War (spillover) Oromo conflict Ethiopia and Sudan Sudanese–Ethiopian clashes Ghana Western Togoland Rebellion Maghreb and Sahel regions Maghreb insurgency Mali Mali War Mozambique Insurgency in Cabo Delgado Nigeria Boko Haram insurgency (incl. Lake Chad region) Communal conflicts in Nigeria Senegal Casamance conflict Somalia Civil war South Sudan Ethnic violence in South Sudan Sudan War in Darfur South Kordofan conflict Sudanese nomadic conflicts (incl. South Sudan) Tunisia ISIL insurgency in Tunisia Western Sahara Western Sahara conflict 2020–2021 Western Saharan clashes Americas Colombia Colombian conflict Mexico Mexican drug war Peru Internal conflict in Peru Paraguay Insurgency in Paraguay Asia-Pacific Afghanistan Panjshir conflict Islamic State–Taliban conflict India Insurgency in Northeast India Assam separatist movements Insurgency in Manipur Ethnic conflict in Nagaland Khalistan movement Naxalite–Maoist insurgency India and Pakistan Kashmir conflict Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines Moro conflict Cross border attacks in Sabah Indonesia Papua conflict Myanmar Internal conflict in Myanmar Kachin conflict Karen conflict Rohingya conflict Pakistan Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Insurgency in Balochistan Philippines Communist rebellion Philippine drug war Thailand South Thailand insurgency Europe Armenia and Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Ukraine War in Donbas Russo-Ukrainian War Ireland and the UK Dissident Irish republican campaign Turkey Kurdish–Turkish conflict Global War on terror Middle East Egypt Sinai insurgency Iran and the Persian Gulf Iran–Israel proxy conflict Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict Sistan and Baluchestan insurgency Arab separatism in Khuzestan Kurdish separatism in Iran Iraq Iraqi conflict American-led intervention in Iraq Iranian intervention in Iraq Iraq and Syria (map) International military intervention against ISIL Israel and Gaza Israel and Syria Israeli-Syrian border conflict Israeli-Syrian ceasefire line incidents Syria American-led intervention in Syria Russian military intervention in the Syrian civil war Turkish occupation of northern Syria Yemen and Saudi Arabia Yemeni Civil War Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen Houthi–Saudi Arabian conflict Further information: List of ongoing armed conflicts edit section 2021 events and developments by topic Arts Architecture – Animation – Anime – Comics – Film (Horror, Science fiction) – Home video – Literature – Music (Classical, Country, Hip hop, Latin, Metal, Rock, UK, US) – Radio – Television (UK, US, Italy, Scotland) – Video games Politics and government Elections – International leaders – Sovereign states – Sovereign state leaders – Territorial governors Science and technology Archaeology – Biotechnology – Computing – Palaeontology – Quantum computing and communication – Senescence research – Sustainable energy research – Space/Astronomy – Spaceflight Environment and environmental sciences Birding/Ornithology – Climate change Transportation Aviation – Rail transport By place Afghanistan – Albania – Algeria – Andorra – Angola – Antarctica – Argentina – Armenia – Australia – Austria – Azerbaijan – Bangladesh – The Bahamas – Bahrain – Barbados – Belarus – Belgium – Benin – Bhutan – Bolivia – Bosnia and Herzegovina – Botswana – Brazil – Bulgaria – Burkina Faso – Burundi – Cambodia – Cameroon – Canada – Cape Verde – Central African Republic – Chad – Chile – China – Colombia – Costa Rica – Comoros – Croatia – Cuba – Cyprus – Czech Republic – Denmark – Ecuador – Egypt – El Salvador – Eritrea – Estonia – Ethiopia – European Union – Eswatini – Fiji – Finland – France – Gabon – Georgia – Germany – Ghana – Greece – Guatemala – Guinea – Guinea-Bissau – Guyana – Haiti – Honduras – Hong Kong – Hungary – Iceland – India – Indonesia – Iran – Iraq – Ireland – Israel – Italy – Ivory Coast – Japan – Jordan – Kazakhstan – Kenya – Kiribati – Kosovo – Kuwait – Kyrgyzstan – Laos – Latvia – Lebanon – Lesotho – Liberia – Libya – Lithuania – Luxembourg – Macau – Madagascar – Marshall Islands – Malawi – Malaysia – Mali – Malta – Mauritania – Mexico – Micronesia – Moldova – Mongolia – Montenegro – Morocco – Mozambique – Myanmar – Nauru – Namibia – Nepal – Netherlands – New Zealand – Nicaragua – Niger – Nigeria – North Korea – North Macedonia – Norway – Oman – Pakistan – Palau – Palestine – Panama – Papua New Guinea – Paraguay – Peru – Philippines – Poland – Portugal – Qatar – Romania – Russia – Rwanda – Samoa – Saudi Arabia – Senegal – Serbia – Seychelles – Singapore – Slovakia – Slovenia – Somalia – South Africa – Solomon Islands – South Korea – South Sudan – Spain – Sri Lanka – Sudan – Sweden – Switzerland – Syria – Taiwan – Tajikistan – Tanzania – Thailand – Togo – Tonga – Tunisia – Turkey – Turkmenistan – Tuvalu – Uganda – Ukraine – United Arab Emirates – United Kingdom – United States – Uruguay – Uzbekistan – Vanuatu – Venezuela – Vietnam – Yemen – Zambia – Zimbabwe Establishments and disestablishments categories Establishments – Disestablishments Works and introductions categories Works – Introductions – Works entering the public domain Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2021. ...more edit section v t e Events by month 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2003 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2002 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2001 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2000 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1999 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1998 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1997 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1996 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1995 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1994 January February March April May June July August September October November December Portal:Current events Calendars Content listings Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured content Good articles Spoken articles Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indices A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Current_events&oldid=1054047874" Categories: All portals 2021 by day Current events portal 2021 Current events History portals Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages protected against vandalism Portals with triaged subpages from October 2020 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Portals with short description Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Ænglisc ??????? ??????? Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????? Banjar Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ??????? Bikol Central Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Dansk ?????? ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara E?egbe ????? Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ??? ??????? Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? IsiZulu Íslenska Kapampangan ??????? ??????? Kurdî Ladino Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Li Niha Limburgs Magyar ?????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau ?????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Nederlands ?????? ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ????????? Piemontèis Polski Português Român? ??????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu ????? ???? Sloven?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ??? ?????? ??? ?????????? ???? Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük Walon ?? ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Zeêuws ?? Dagbanli Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 19:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement