https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 John V. Moran before she sank SS John V. Moran was a wooden-hulled American package freighter in service between 1888 and 1899. She was built in 1888 in West Bay City, Michigan, by F.W. Wheeler & Company. She was built for Ward's Crescent Transportation Company of Detroit, Michigan, and was operated as part of his Detroit & Lake Superior Line. She was built to haul both bulk, and package freight. Throughout the 1893 shipping season, John V. Moran ran between Buffalo, New York, and Duluth, Minnesota. She was sold for the first time in 1895 to the Union Transit Line of Buffalo, and once again in 1898 to the Crosby Transportation Company of Milwaukee, Wisconsin. On February 9, 1899, John V. Moran was bound from Milwaukee for Muskegon, Michigan, with a cargo of barreled flour and various package goods, when a piece of ice cut a hole in her hull, causing water to leak in on Lake Michigan. Her crew alerted the nearby steamer Naomi using John V. Moran's whistle. Three of John V. Moran's crew walked across the ice to Naomi. Upon receiving the crew of John V. Moran, Naomi headed over to John V. Moran and removed the rest of her crew. On February 10, Naomi took John V. Moran in tow, but she was leaking too badly to make it to Muskegon. On the morning of February 11, John V. Moran's crew walked back to her across the ice in order to retrieve everything of value on board. Her crew arrived at Grand Haven, Michigan, the following night. The John V. Moran was still afloat on February 12, having been sighted by the ferry Muskegon who was on her way to Muskegon. She sank without loss of life the same day. (Full article...) Image 2 State Route 822 (SR 822) is an unsigned east–west state highway in the eastern portion of the U.S. state of Ohio. The short route was designated in 1990. Its western terminus is at the intersection of 7th Street and the on-/off-ramps for U.S. Route 22 (US 22), where it serves as a connection between the U.S. Route and SR 7, the route's eastern terminus. The whole route is in Steubenville, after multiple truncations due to the demolition of Fort Steuben Bridge. (Full article...) Image 3 USS Iowan (ID-3002) is seen here in 1919 returning American troops from France. SS Iowan was a cargo ship built in 1914 for the American-Hawaiian Steamship Company. During World War I she was taken over by the United States Navy and commissioned as USS Iowan (ID-3002). During World War II, the ship was transferred to the Soviet Union and renamed SS Tashkent (or ??????? in Cyrillic). Iowan was built by the Maryland Steel Company as one of eight sister ships for the American-Hawaiian Steamship Company. In October 1914, five months after she was delivered to American-Hawaiian, Iowan rammed and sank the United Fruit Company steamer Metapan near the entrance to New York Harbor. After repairs, Iowan resumed inter-coastal service via the Panama Canal. When the canal was temporarily closed by landslides in late 1915, Iowan sailed via the Straits of Magellan until the canal reopened in mid 1916. During World War I, USS Iowan carried cargo, animals, and a limited number of passengers to France, and returned nearly 10,000 American troops after the Armistice. (Full article...) Image 4 Movieland, also known as Movieland.com, Moviepass.tv and Popcorn.net, was a subscription-based movie download service that has been the subject of thousands of complaints to the Federal Trade Commission, the Washington State Attorney General's Office, the Better Business Bureau, and other agencies by consumers who said they were held hostage by its repeated pop-up windows and demands for payment, triggered after a free 3-day trial period. Many said they had never even heard of Movieland until they saw their first pop-up. Movieland advertised that the service had "no spyware", and that no personal information would need to be filled out to begin the free trial. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) filed a complaint against Movieland and eleven other defendants in August 2006, charging them with having "engaged in a nationwide scheme to use deception and coercion to extract payments from consumers." The Attorney General of the state of Washington also filed a complaint, charging Movieland and several other defendants with violating that state's Computer Spyware Act and its Consumer Protection Act. (Full article...) Image 5 Pennsylvania Route 958 (PA 958, also designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as SR 0958) is an 8.63-mile-long (13.89 km) state highway located in Warren County, Pennsylvania. The designation's southern terminus is at an intersection with U.S. Route 6 (US 6) in Pittsfield Township. The route heads through several small communities, including Lottsville, where it goes on a short concurrency with PA 957. The northern terminus is at the New York state line at Freehold Township, just east of Bear Lake. There, the route continues through New York as Chautauqua County Route 33 (CR 33). PA 958 was designated in 1928 as a connector from US 6 to the community of Wrightsville, where the designation terminated. The route was extended northward along its current alignment in 1936 and has remained unchanged since. (Full article...) Image 6 The West Somerset Mineral Railway was a standard gauge line in Somerset, England. Originally expected to be 13 miles 420 yards (21.3 km) long its length as built was 11+1?2 miles (18.5 km), with a 310 yards (280 m) branch to Raleigh's Cross Mine. The line's core purpose was to carry iron ore northwards from mines on the Brendon Hills to Watchet harbour on the Bristol Channel. From there the ore was shipped northwards to Newport where it was unloaded onto railway wagons and hauled to ironworks at Ebbw Vale. The line opened as intended in 1861. Passenger services commenced in 1865. The mines' and line's "period of prosperity" ended in 1875 and by 1883 all mining had ceased. The line lingered on for passengers and small goods until 1898, when it closed. A new mineral venture was attempted in 1907, for which much of the line was re-opened and a 2 ft (610 mm)-gauge extension was added, but this failed and the line closed again in 1910. A section of the track was used to test and demonstrate an automatic signal warning device in 1911 and occasionally used in that connection up to 1914. The tracks were lifted for scrap in 1917, after which a light railway was laid on part of the trackbed in 1918 to carry timber. This ended in 1920 and the company was wound up in 1925. (Full article...) Image 7 A Reed water tube boiler built for HMS Janus of 1895: the incomplete casing allows a view of the arrangement of the steam-generating tubes. The two large, external tubes at the near end, and another pair at the far end, known as "down-comers", passed cooler water from the top chamber to the two bottom chambers, thereby enhancing circulation. The Reed water tube boiler was a type of water tube boiler developed by J. W. Reed, manager of the engine works at Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company of Jarrow, England, where it was manufactured from 1893 to 1905. At this time, Palmers was a vertically integrated business: in its shipyard at Jarrow, using iron ore from its own mine in North Yorkshire, it produced the iron and steel needed for its ships, and engines and boilers of its own design. Intended for use in the steam propulsion of ships, the Reed water tube boiler was similar to other boilers such as the Normand and Yarrow, themselves developments of the du Temple boiler. These differed from locomotive boilers, also known as "fire tube boilers", in that, whereas the fire tube boiler consisted of a cylinder filled with water, which was heated by tubes passing through it carrying exhaust gases from a furnace, in the water tube boiler the situation was reversed, with water passing through steam-generating tubes mounted directly above the furnace. Advantages of the water tube boiler included comparative lightness and the ability to run at higher pressures. About 170 of Reed's water tube boilers were installed in ships of the Royal Navy, in two of which they were installed to replace boilers rejected by the Admiralty. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 2 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 3 Mark IV tankPhotograph: Peter Trimming The Mark IV tank was introduced by the British in May 1917 to fight in World War I. The "female" version, as pictured here, was armed with five machine guns. Production of the Mark IV ceased at the end of the War in 1918. A small number served briefly with other combatants afterwards. This Mark IV tank, on display in Ashford, Kent, was presented to the town after the end of World War I. The engine was removed to install an electricity substation inside it, though this substation was subsequently removed; the tank's interior is now empty. Image 4 Steam turbinePhoto credit: Christian Kuhna The rotor of a modern steam turbine , which converts steam (heat) energy into kinetic (mechanical) energy. The steam path is from the smallest blade, expanding through progressively larger blade elements. Steam turbines are used in power plants to extract mechanical work from pressurized steam and benefit from their high efficiency and high power-to-weight ratio compared to other technologies, leading to their widespread deployment from electricity generation to marine propulsion. Image 5 Fuel injectionImage credit: WikipedianProlific An animated cut-away diagram of a typical fuel injector, which is used to spray controlled amounts of petrol (gasoline) into an internal combustion engine. A solenoid is activated when fuel is intended to be delivered to the engine, causing the plunger to become pulled toward the solenoid by magnetic force. This uncovers the valve opening, allowing fuel to flow into the atomiser and out the spray tip. The route of fuel is shown in orange; grey/blue indicates no fuel present. Image 6 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 7 Union Pacific 844Photo: Drew Jacksich; edit: Bruce1ee Union Pacific 844 at Painted Rocks, Nevada, on a run from Elko to Sparks, on September 15, 2009. Built in 1944, it was the last steam locomotive delivered to Union Pacific and is the only steam locomotive never retired by a North American Class I railroad. Image 8 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 9 BMW S1000RRPhotograph credit: Stefan Krause The BMW S1000RR is a sport bike made by BMW Motorrad. It was introduced in 2008, initially for competition in the 2009 Superbike World Championship, and has been in commercial production since then. Powered by a 999 cc (61.0 cu in) four-cylinder engine, redlined at 14,200 rpm, it delivers 133.6 kW (179.2 hp; 181.6 PS) to the rear wheel, making it the most powerful motorcycle in the class. Rubén Xaus and Troy Corser rode the bike for its inaugural Superbike World Championship in 2009, gaining highest finishes of fifth and seventh respectively, but it achieved greater success in the 2010 FIM Superstock 1000 championship season, with rider Ayrton Badovini winning every single race but one on the S1000RR. Image 10 Aerospike enginePhoto credit: Marshall Space Flight Center A test firing of twin linear XRS-2200 aerospike engines, originally built for the Lockheed Martin X-33, a next-generation, commercially operated reusable launch vehicle. The aerospike engine is a type of rocket engine that maintains its efficiency across a wide range of altitudes through the use of an aerospike nozzle. A vehicle with an aerospike engine uses 25-30% less fuel at low altitudes, where most missions have the greatest need for thrust. Image 11 RiggerPhoto credit: Alfred T. Palmer "Big Pete" Ramagos, rigger at work on Douglas Dam, Tennessee, June 1942. A rigger is a person or company which specializes in the lifting and/or moving of extremely large and/or heavy objects. Riggers use equipment expressly designed for moving and lifting objects where ordinary material handling equipment cannot go. Image 12 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 13 M198 howitzerPhoto credit: L Cpl. Samantha L. Jones, USMC Nine Marines from Mike Battery, 4th Battalion, 14th Marines operate the 155mm M198 howitzer in November 2004. The battery was based at Camp Fallujah, Iraq and was supporting Operation Phantom Fury. All nine members of the M198 crew are present. Image 14 KeypunchPicture: Unknown; restoration: Mmxx A woman using a Hollerith pantograph, a machine developed by Herman Hollerith for the punching of cards, providing data which could then be processed. Such tools were used in the 1890 United States Census, the first time the country's census was tabulated by machine. Image 15 Thomas EdisonPhoto: Bachrach Studios; Restoration: Michel Vuijlsteke Thomas Edison (1847–1931) was an American inventor, scientist and businessman who developed many devices that greatly influenced life around the world, including the phonograph, the motion picture camera, and a long-lasting, practical electric light bulb. Dubbed "The Wizard of Menlo Park" (now Edison, New Jersey) by a newspaper reporter, he was one of the first inventors to apply the principles of mass production and large teamwork to the process of invention, and therefore is often credited with the creation of the first industrial research laboratory. Edison is considered one of the most prolific inventors in history, holding 1,093 U.S. patents in his name, as well as many patents in the United Kingdom, France and Germany. Image 16 Movable typePhoto credit: Willi Heidelbach A composing stick and movable type, the system of printing and typography using pieces of metal type, made by casting from matrices struck by letterpunches. The text on the stick reads, "The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog and feels as if he were in the seventh heaven of typography together with Hermann Zapf, the most famous artist of the" [sic]. Image 17 Wiesen ViaductPhotograph: David Gubler The Wiesen Viaduct is a single-track railway viaduct (concrete blocks with dimension stone coverage) which spans the Landwasser southwest of the hamlet of Wiesen, Switzerland. Designed by Henning Friedrich, then the chief engineer of the Rhaetian Railway, it was built between 1906 and 1909 by the contractor G. Marasi (Westermann & Cie, Zürich) under the supervision of P. Salaz and Hans Studer (RhB). The Rhaetian Railway still owns and uses the viaduct today for regular service with 29 passenger trains per day. An important element of the Davos–Filisur railway, the viaduct is 88.9 metres (292 ft) high, 210 metres (690 ft) long, and has a main span of 55 metres (180 ft). In 1926, the viaduct was the inspiration for Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's painting Brücke bei Wiesen. Image 18 Hybrid-propellant rocketPhotograph credit: Matt Steiner and Kees08 A hybrid-propellant rocket is a rocket with an engine that uses propellants in two different phases, one solid and the other gaseous or liquid. The concept can be traced back to at least the 1930s. This picture shows a transparent 3D-printed hybrid-rocket fuel grain with dual helical fuel ports, a post-combustion chamber, and a de Laval nozzle, photographed prior to the hot-fire test. The motor used nitrous oxide as the oxidizer and Pyrodex pellets for the igniter. Image 19 Filling stationPhotograph: Uwe Aranas A filling station in Sabah, Malaysia, operated by Royal Dutch Shell. Filling stations, also known under a wide variety of names, are facilities that sell fuel and engine lubricants for motor vehicles. They include one or more fuel dispensers, which distribute fuels such as gasoline and diesel into the tanks within vehicles and calculate the financial cost of the fuel transferred. Filling stations may also include air compressors and electricity sockets, which may inflate tyres or offer charging stations. Many filling stations also incorporate a convenience store, where customers can purchase snacks and other goods. Image 20 Paddle steamerDaguerreotype credit: Unknown A daguerreotype from the 1850s of the Ben Campbell, a paddle steamer—a ship or boat driven by a steam engine that uses one or more paddle wheels to develop thrust for propulsion. The paddle wheel was the first form of mechanical propulsion for a boat, but has now been almost entirely superseded by more modern forms of marine propulsion. Did you know - show different entries ... that the National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management has conducted research to improve the taste and nutrition of a children's dietary supplement distributed by the government of Kerala? ... that Research Policy is regarded as the leading journal in the field of innovation studies? ... that the melt-blowing technology used to create N95 respirators was previously used to produce ready-made ribbon bows and bra cups? ... that technology executive Scott A. McGregor was the lead developer of Windows 1.0? ... that Carlisle & Finch used carbon-arc technology in both toy trains and military searchlights? ... that while raising two young children, Li Minhua became the first woman to earn a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at MIT? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. A centibillionaire with a net worth of around US$285 billion as of November 2021, Musk is the richest person in the world. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020 services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 John V. Moran before she sank SS John V. Moran was a wooden-hulled American package freighter in service between 1888 and 1899. She was built in 1888 in West Bay City, Michigan, by F.W. Wheeler & Company. She was built for Ward's Crescent Transportation Company of Detroit, Michigan, and was operated as part of his Detroit & Lake Superior Line. She was built to haul both bulk, and package freight. Throughout the 1893 shipping season, John V. Moran ran between Buffalo, New York, and Duluth, Minnesota. She was sold for the first time in 1895 to the Union Transit Line of Buffalo, and once again in 1898 to the Crosby Transportation Company of Milwaukee, Wisconsin. On February 9, 1899, John V. Moran was bound from Milwaukee for Muskegon, Michigan, with a cargo of barreled flour and various package goods, when a piece of ice cut a hole in her hull, causing water to leak in on Lake Michigan. Her crew alerted the nearby steamer Naomi using John V. Moran's whistle. Three of John V. Moran's crew walked across the ice to Naomi. Upon receiving the crew of John V. Moran, Naomi headed over to John V. Moran and removed the rest of her crew. On February 10, Naomi took John V. Moran in tow, but she was leaking too badly to make it to Muskegon. On the morning of February 11, John V. Moran's crew walked back to her across the ice in order to retrieve everything of value on board. Her crew arrived at Grand Haven, Michigan, the following night. The John V. Moran was still afloat on February 12, having been sighted by the ferry Muskegon who was on her way to Muskegon. She sank without loss of life the same day. (Full article...) Image 2 State Route 822 (SR 822) is an unsigned east–west state highway in the eastern portion of the U.S. state of Ohio. The short route was designated in 1990. Its western terminus is at the intersection of 7th Street and the on-/off-ramps for U.S. Route 22 (US 22), where it serves as a connection between the U.S. Route and SR 7, the route's eastern terminus. The whole route is in Steubenville, after multiple truncations due to the demolition of Fort Steuben Bridge. (Full article...) Image 3 USS Iowan (ID-3002) is seen here in 1919 returning American troops from France. SS Iowan was a cargo ship built in 1914 for the American-Hawaiian Steamship Company. During World War I she was taken over by the United States Navy and commissioned as USS Iowan (ID-3002). During World War II, the ship was transferred to the Soviet Union and renamed SS Tashkent (or ??????? in Cyrillic). Iowan was built by the Maryland Steel Company as one of eight sister ships for the American-Hawaiian Steamship Company. In October 1914, five months after she was delivered to American-Hawaiian, Iowan rammed and sank the United Fruit Company steamer Metapan near the entrance to New York Harbor. After repairs, Iowan resumed inter-coastal service via the Panama Canal. When the canal was temporarily closed by landslides in late 1915, Iowan sailed via the Straits of Magellan until the canal reopened in mid 1916. During World War I, USS Iowan carried cargo, animals, and a limited number of passengers to France, and returned nearly 10,000 American troops after the Armistice. (Full article...) Image 4 Movieland, also known as Movieland.com, Moviepass.tv and Popcorn.net, was a subscription-based movie download service that has been the subject of thousands of complaints to the Federal Trade Commission, the Washington State Attorney General's Office, the Better Business Bureau, and other agencies by consumers who said they were held hostage by its repeated pop-up windows and demands for payment, triggered after a free 3-day trial period. Many said they had never even heard of Movieland until they saw their first pop-up. Movieland advertised that the service had "no spyware", and that no personal information would need to be filled out to begin the free trial. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) filed a complaint against Movieland and eleven other defendants in August 2006, charging them with having "engaged in a nationwide scheme to use deception and coercion to extract payments from consumers." The Attorney General of the state of Washington also filed a complaint, charging Movieland and several other defendants with violating that state's Computer Spyware Act and its Consumer Protection Act. (Full article...) Image 5 Pennsylvania Route 958 (PA 958, also designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as SR 0958) is an 8.63-mile-long (13.89 km) state highway located in Warren County, Pennsylvania. The designation's southern terminus is at an intersection with U.S. Route 6 (US 6) in Pittsfield Township. The route heads through several small communities, including Lottsville, where it goes on a short concurrency with PA 957. The northern terminus is at the New York state line at Freehold Township, just east of Bear Lake. There, the route continues through New York as Chautauqua County Route 33 (CR 33). PA 958 was designated in 1928 as a connector from US 6 to the community of Wrightsville, where the designation terminated. The route was extended northward along its current alignment in 1936 and has remained unchanged since. (Full article...) Image 6 The West Somerset Mineral Railway was a standard gauge line in Somerset, England. Originally expected to be 13 miles 420 yards (21.3 km) long its length as built was 11+1?2 miles (18.5 km), with a 310 yards (280 m) branch to Raleigh's Cross Mine. The line's core purpose was to carry iron ore northwards from mines on the Brendon Hills to Watchet harbour on the Bristol Channel. From there the ore was shipped northwards to Newport where it was unloaded onto railway wagons and hauled to ironworks at Ebbw Vale. The line opened as intended in 1861. Passenger services commenced in 1865. The mines' and line's "period of prosperity" ended in 1875 and by 1883 all mining had ceased. The line lingered on for passengers and small goods until 1898, when it closed. A new mineral venture was attempted in 1907, for which much of the line was re-opened and a 2 ft (610 mm)-gauge extension was added, but this failed and the line closed again in 1910. A section of the track was used to test and demonstrate an automatic signal warning device in 1911 and occasionally used in that connection up to 1914. The tracks were lifted for scrap in 1917, after which a light railway was laid on part of the trackbed in 1918 to carry timber. This ended in 1920 and the company was wound up in 1925. (Full article...) Image 7 A Reed water tube boiler built for HMS Janus of 1895: the incomplete casing allows a view of the arrangement of the steam-generating tubes. The two large, external tubes at the near end, and another pair at the far end, known as "down-comers", passed cooler water from the top chamber to the two bottom chambers, thereby enhancing circulation. The Reed water tube boiler was a type of water tube boiler developed by J. W. Reed, manager of the engine works at Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company of Jarrow, England, where it was manufactured from 1893 to 1905. At this time, Palmers was a vertically integrated business: in its shipyard at Jarrow, using iron ore from its own mine in North Yorkshire, it produced the iron and steel needed for its ships, and engines and boilers of its own design. Intended for use in the steam propulsion of ships, the Reed water tube boiler was similar to other boilers such as the Normand and Yarrow, themselves developments of the du Temple boiler. These differed from locomotive boilers, also known as "fire tube boilers", in that, whereas the fire tube boiler consisted of a cylinder filled with water, which was heated by tubes passing through it carrying exhaust gases from a furnace, in the water tube boiler the situation was reversed, with water passing through steam-generating tubes mounted directly above the furnace. Advantages of the water tube boiler included comparative lightness and the ability to run at higher pressures. About 170 of Reed's water tube boilers were installed in ships of the Royal Navy, in two of which they were installed to replace boilers rejected by the Admiralty. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 2 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 3 Mark IV tankPhotograph: Peter Trimming The Mark IV tank was introduced by the British in May 1917 to fight in World War I. The "female" version, as pictured here, was armed with five machine guns. Production of the Mark IV ceased at the end of the War in 1918. A small number served briefly with other combatants afterwards. This Mark IV tank, on display in Ashford, Kent, was presented to the town after the end of World War I. The engine was removed to install an electricity substation inside it, though this substation was subsequently removed; the tank's interior is now empty. Image 4 Steam turbinePhoto credit: Christian Kuhna The rotor of a modern steam turbine , which converts steam (heat) energy into kinetic (mechanical) energy. The steam path is from the smallest blade, expanding through progressively larger blade elements. Steam turbines are used in power plants to extract mechanical work from pressurized steam and benefit from their high efficiency and high power-to-weight ratio compared to other technologies, leading to their widespread deployment from electricity generation to marine propulsion. Image 5 Fuel injectionImage credit: WikipedianProlific An animated cut-away diagram of a typical fuel injector, which is used to spray controlled amounts of petrol (gasoline) into an internal combustion engine. A solenoid is activated when fuel is intended to be delivered to the engine, causing the plunger to become pulled toward the solenoid by magnetic force. This uncovers the valve opening, allowing fuel to flow into the atomiser and out the spray tip. The route of fuel is shown in orange; grey/blue indicates no fuel present. Image 6 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 7 Union Pacific 844Photo: Drew Jacksich; edit: Bruce1ee Union Pacific 844 at Painted Rocks, Nevada, on a run from Elko to Sparks, on September 15, 2009. Built in 1944, it was the last steam locomotive delivered to Union Pacific and is the only steam locomotive never retired by a North American Class I railroad. Image 8 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 9 BMW S1000RRPhotograph credit: Stefan Krause The BMW S1000RR is a sport bike made by BMW Motorrad. It was introduced in 2008, initially for competition in the 2009 Superbike World Championship, and has been in commercial production since then. Powered by a 999 cc (61.0 cu in) four-cylinder engine, redlined at 14,200 rpm, it delivers 133.6 kW (179.2 hp; 181.6 PS) to the rear wheel, making it the most powerful motorcycle in the class. Rubén Xaus and Troy Corser rode the bike for its inaugural Superbike World Championship in 2009, gaining highest finishes of fifth and seventh respectively, but it achieved greater success in the 2010 FIM Superstock 1000 championship season, with rider Ayrton Badovini winning every single race but one on the S1000RR. Image 10 Aerospike enginePhoto credit: Marshall Space Flight Center A test firing of twin linear XRS-2200 aerospike engines, originally built for the Lockheed Martin X-33, a next-generation, commercially operated reusable launch vehicle. The aerospike engine is a type of rocket engine that maintains its efficiency across a wide range of altitudes through the use of an aerospike nozzle. A vehicle with an aerospike engine uses 25-30% less fuel at low altitudes, where most missions have the greatest need for thrust. Image 11 RiggerPhoto credit: Alfred T. Palmer "Big Pete" Ramagos, rigger at work on Douglas Dam, Tennessee, June 1942. A rigger is a person or company which specializes in the lifting and/or moving of extremely large and/or heavy objects. Riggers use equipment expressly designed for moving and lifting objects where ordinary material handling equipment cannot go. Image 12 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 13 M198 howitzerPhoto credit: L Cpl. Samantha L. Jones, USMC Nine Marines from Mike Battery, 4th Battalion, 14th Marines operate the 155mm M198 howitzer in November 2004. The battery was based at Camp Fallujah, Iraq and was supporting Operation Phantom Fury. All nine members of the M198 crew are present. Image 14 KeypunchPicture: Unknown; restoration: Mmxx A woman using a Hollerith pantograph, a machine developed by Herman Hollerith for the punching of cards, providing data which could then be processed. Such tools were used in the 1890 United States Census, the first time the country's census was tabulated by machine. Image 15 Thomas EdisonPhoto: Bachrach Studios; Restoration: Michel Vuijlsteke Thomas Edison (1847–1931) was an American inventor, scientist and businessman who developed many devices that greatly influenced life around the world, including the phonograph, the motion picture camera, and a long-lasting, practical electric light bulb. Dubbed "The Wizard of Menlo Park" (now Edison, New Jersey) by a newspaper reporter, he was one of the first inventors to apply the principles of mass production and large teamwork to the process of invention, and therefore is often credited with the creation of the first industrial research laboratory. Edison is considered one of the most prolific inventors in history, holding 1,093 U.S. patents in his name, as well as many patents in the United Kingdom, France and Germany. Image 16 Movable typePhoto credit: Willi Heidelbach A composing stick and movable type, the system of printing and typography using pieces of metal type, made by casting from matrices struck by letterpunches. The text on the stick reads, "The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog and feels as if he were in the seventh heaven of typography together with Hermann Zapf, the most famous artist of the" [sic]. Image 17 Wiesen ViaductPhotograph: David Gubler The Wiesen Viaduct is a single-track railway viaduct (concrete blocks with dimension stone coverage) which spans the Landwasser southwest of the hamlet of Wiesen, Switzerland. Designed by Henning Friedrich, then the chief engineer of the Rhaetian Railway, it was built between 1906 and 1909 by the contractor G. Marasi (Westermann & Cie, Zürich) under the supervision of P. Salaz and Hans Studer (RhB). The Rhaetian Railway still owns and uses the viaduct today for regular service with 29 passenger trains per day. An important element of the Davos–Filisur railway, the viaduct is 88.9 metres (292 ft) high, 210 metres (690 ft) long, and has a main span of 55 metres (180 ft). In 1926, the viaduct was the inspiration for Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's painting Brücke bei Wiesen. Image 18 Hybrid-propellant rocketPhotograph credit: Matt Steiner and Kees08 A hybrid-propellant rocket is a rocket with an engine that uses propellants in two different phases, one solid and the other gaseous or liquid. The concept can be traced back to at least the 1930s. This picture shows a transparent 3D-printed hybrid-rocket fuel grain with dual helical fuel ports, a post-combustion chamber, and a de Laval nozzle, photographed prior to the hot-fire test. The motor used nitrous oxide as the oxidizer and Pyrodex pellets for the igniter. Image 19 Filling stationPhotograph: Uwe Aranas A filling station in Sabah, Malaysia, operated by Royal Dutch Shell. Filling stations, also known under a wide variety of names, are facilities that sell fuel and engine lubricants for motor vehicles. They include one or more fuel dispensers, which distribute fuels such as gasoline and diesel into the tanks within vehicles and calculate the financial cost of the fuel transferred. Filling stations may also include air compressors and electricity sockets, which may inflate tyres or offer charging stations. Many filling stations also incorporate a convenience store, where customers can purchase snacks and other goods. Image 20 Paddle steamerDaguerreotype credit: Unknown A daguerreotype from the 1850s of the Ben Campbell, a paddle steamer—a ship or boat driven by a steam engine that uses one or more paddle wheels to develop thrust for propulsion. The paddle wheel was the first form of mechanical propulsion for a boat, but has now been almost entirely superseded by more modern forms of marine propulsion. Did you know - show different entries ... that the National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management has conducted research to improve the taste and nutrition of a children's dietary supplement distributed by the government of Kerala? ... that Research Policy is regarded as the leading journal in the field of innovation studies? ... that the melt-blowing technology used to create N95 respirators was previously used to produce ready-made ribbon bows and bra cups? ... that technology executive Scott A. McGregor was the lead developer of Windows 1.0? ... that Carlisle & Finch used carbon-arc technology in both toy trains and military searchlights? ... that while raising two young children, Li Minhua became the first woman to earn a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at MIT? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. A centibillionaire with a net worth of around US$285 billion as of November 2021, Musk is the richest person in the world. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020 services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 State Route 257 (SR 257, OH 257) is a 26.19-mile (42.15 km) north - south state highway in the central portion of the U.S. state of Ohio. The highway's southern terminus is in the northwestern Columbus suburb of Dublin at a roundabout intersection with U.S. Route 33 (US 33) and SR 161. This mainly two-lane highway follows the eastern side of the Scioto River from Dublin to its junction with US 42. After crossing over the river with the U.S. highway, SR 257 parallels the river's western bank. SR 257 has its northern terminus at a T-intersection with SR 47 on the western village limits of Prospect. SR 257 was created in 1926, and extended in 1935 and 1937. (Full article...) Image 2 King's Cross St. Pancras is a London Underground station on Euston Road in the Borough of Camden, Central London. It serves King's Cross and St Pancras main line stations in fare zone 1, and is an interchange between six Underground lines. The station was one of the first to open on the network; as of 2021, it is the most used station on the network for passenger entrances and exits combined. The station opened in 1863 as part of the Metropolitan Railway, subsequently catering for the Hammersmith & City and Circle lines. It was expanded in 1868 with the opening of the City Widened Lines, and the Northern and Piccadilly platforms opened in the early 20th century. During the 1930s and 1940s, the station was restructured and partially rebuilt to cater for expanded traffic. The Victoria line connection opened in 1968. The 1987 King's Cross fire that killed 31 people is one of the deadliest accidents to occur on the Underground and resulted in widespread safety improvements and changes throughout the network. The station was extensively rebuilt in the early 21st century to cater for Eurostar services that moved from Waterloo to St Pancras, reopening in 2007. (Full article...) Image 3 Lexus (????, Rekusasu) is the luxury vehicle division of the Japanese automaker Toyota. The Lexus brand is marketed in more than 70 countries and territories worldwide and is Japan's largest-selling make of premium cars. It has ranked among the 10 largest Japanese global brands in market value. Lexus is headquartered in Nagoya, Japan. Operational centers are located in Brussels, Belgium, and Plano, Texas, United States. Created at around the same time as Japanese rivals Honda and Nissan created their Acura and Infiniti luxury divisions respectively, Lexus originated from a corporate project to develop a new premium sedan, code-named F1, which began in 1983 and culminated in the launch of the Lexus LS in 1989. Subsequently, the division added sedan, coupé, convertible and SUV models. Lexus did not exist as a brand in its home market until 2005, and all vehicles marketed internationally as Lexus from 1989 to 2005 were released in Japan under the Toyota marque and an equivalent model name. In 2005, a hybrid version of the RX crossover debuted and additional hybrid models later joined the division's lineup. Lexus launched its own F marque performance division in 2007 with the debut of the IS F sport sedan, followed by the LFA supercar in 2009. (Full article...) Image 4 Telephone cable containing multiple twisted-pair lines The primary line constants are parameters that describe the characteristics of conductive transmission lines, such as pairs of copper wires, in terms of the physical electrical properties of the line. The primary line constants are only relevant to transmission lines and are to be contrasted with the secondary line constants, which can be derived from them, and are more generally applicable. The secondary line constants can be used, for instance, to compare the characteristics of a waveguide to a copper line, whereas the primary constants have no meaning for a waveguide. The constants are conductor resistance and inductance, and insulator capacitance and conductance, which are by convention given the symbols R, L, C, and G respectively. The constants are enumerated in terms of per unit length. The circuit representation of these elements requires a distributed-element model and consequently calculus must be used to analyse the circuit. The analysis yields a system of two first order, simultaneous linear partial differential equations which may be combined to derive the secondary constants of characteristic impedance and propagation constant. (Full article...) Image 5 New York State Route 9L (NY 9L) is a state highway in Warren County, New York, in the United States. The road is 18.58 miles (29.90 km) long and is a suffixed highway of U.S. Route 9 (US 9). NY 9L goes through three municipalities in Warren County: the city of Glens Falls, the town of Queensbury and the town of Lake George. It starts at an intersection with US 9 and NY 32 in Glens Falls and ends at a junction with US 9 and NY 9N in Lake George. NY 9L is a scenic route for people traveling to Lake George as the road provides many views of the lake. The route was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York along the path of an old military road originally built during the American Revolution. (Full article...) Image 6 A selfie of Kottmann in 2021 Tillie Kottmann (born August 7, 1999), also known as deletescape, is a Swiss developer and computer hacker. Kottmann worked in information technology as a teenager, becoming the founding developer of a popular application launcher for Android. She is known for having leaked source code and other data from companies such as Intel and Nissan and was part of a group that hacked into Verkada in March 2021 and accessed more than 150,000 cameras. Kottmann has cited anarchism, anti-capitalism, and her opposition to the concept of intellectual property as the motives for her hacking. In March 2021, Kottmann was indicted by a grand jury in the United States on criminal charges related to her alleged hacking activity between 2019 and 2021. The charges were unrelated to the hack of Verkada. Her home and her parents' home were raided by the Swiss police at the request of United States authorities, and her electronic devices were seized. People used the hashtag "#freetillie" to express support for Kottmann in the aftermath of the raid, and the Swiss magazine Republik compared her to Jeremy Hammond and Aaron Swartz. (Full article...) Image 7 Northbound R train arriving at the station 77th Street is a station on the BMT Fourth Avenue Line of the New York City Subway. Located at 77th Street and Fourth Avenue in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, it is served by the R train at all times. The 77th Street station was constructed as part of the Fourth Avenue Line, which was approved in 1905 and subsequently modified. Construction on the segment of the line that includes 77th Street started on January 24, 1913, and was completed in 1915. The station opened on January 15, 1916, as part of an extension of the BMT Fourth Avenue Line from 59th Street to 86th Street. The station's platforms were lengthened in 1926–1927 and in 1968-1970. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 2 WindmillPhoto credit: Michael Reeve Pitstone Windmill, believed to be the oldest windmill in the British Isles A windmill is an engine powered by wind energy. In Europe, windmills have been used since the Middle Ages. They were developed from the 12th century, apparently from technology gained by crusaders who came into contact with windmills in the Middle East. Persian sources indicate windmill use as early as the 7th century BC. In the United States, the development of water-pumping windmills was a major factor in allowing the farming of vast areas of North America. More selected pictures Image 3 Sukhoi Superjet 100Photograph: Katsuhiko Tokunaga/SuperJet International The Sukhoi Superjet 100 is a modern fly-by-wire twin-engine regional jet with 8 to 108 passenger seats. Development began in 2000; the aircraft had its maiden flight on 19 May 2008 and entered commercial service on 21 April 2011. This aircraft is seen flying off the coast of Italy near Sanremo. More selected pictures Image 4 RiggerPhoto credit: Alfred T. Palmer "Big Pete" Ramagos, rigger at work on Douglas Dam, Tennessee, June 1942. A rigger is a person or company which specializes in the lifting and/or moving of extremely large and/or heavy objects. Riggers use equipment expressly designed for moving and lifting objects where ordinary material handling equipment cannot go. More selected pictures Image 5 Union Pacific 844Photo: Drew Jacksich; edit: Bruce1ee Union Pacific 844 at Painted Rocks, Nevada, on a run from Elko to Sparks, on September 15, 2009. Built in 1944, it was the last steam locomotive delivered to Union Pacific and is the only steam locomotive never retired by a North American Class I railroad. More selected pictures Image 6 Apple Bandai PippinPhotograph: Evan Amos The Apple Bandai Pippin is a multimedia technology console designed by Apple Computer based on the Apple Pippin platform, and produced by Bandai. Only 100,000 of the consoles were produced between its 1996 release and 1997 discontinuation. The Bandai Pippin was intended to create an inexpensive computer aimed mostly at playing CD-based multimedia software, especially games, but also functioning as a thin client. More selected pictures Image 7 Kitty JoynerPhotograph: NACA Kitty Joyner (1916–1993) was an American electrical engineer with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), and then the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). She was hired in 1939 as the organization's first woman engineer, shortly after she had become the first woman to graduate from the University of Virginia's engineering program. More selected pictures Image 8 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 9 Parabolic antennaPhoto credit: Richard Bartz A parabolic antenna, a high-gain reflector antenna used for radio, television and data communications, at Erdfunkstelle Raisting, the largest facility for satellite communication in the world, based in Raisting, Bavaria, Germany. Parabolic antennas work by reflecting electromagnetic radiation off the paraboloid dish to or from the feed horn (center), for reception or transmission respectively. More selected pictures Image 10 Empire State BuildingImage credit: Lewis Hine A structural worker bolts beams on the framework during the construction of the Empire State Building in New York City. The 1,250-foot (380 m) building opened on May 1, 1931, at the time the tallest building in the world, overtaking the Chrysler Building (seen to the right), which had just been completed the year before. The addition of a pinnacle and antennas later increased its overall height to 1,472 feet (449 m). More selected pictures Image 11 MicrometerPhotograph: Lucasbosch A micrometer is a device incorporating a calibrated screw, widely used for precise measurement of components in mechanical engineering and machining. Micrometers are usually, but not always, in the form of calipers (opposing ends joined by a frame). The spindle is a very accurately machined screw and the object to be measured is placed between the spindle and the anvil. The spindle is moved by turning the ratchet knob or thimble until the object to be measured is lightly touched by both the spindle and the anvil. More selected pictures Image 12 Australia Telescope Compact ArrayPhotograph credit: John Masterson, CSIRO; restored by Bammesk The Australia Telescope Compact Array is a radio telescope operated by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) at the Paul Wild Observatory, 25 km (16 mi) west of the town of Narrabri in New South Wales, Australia. The telescope is an array of six identical dishes each 22 metres (72 ft) in diameter, which commonly operate in aperture synthesis mode to produce images from radio waves. Five of the dishes can be moved along a 3-kilometre (2 mi) railway track; the sixth is situated three kilometres west of the end of the main track. Each dish weighs about 270 tonnes (270 long tons; 300 short tons). This photograph, showing five of the Australia Telescope Compact Array's dishes, was taken around 1984, in the late phase of the construction process. It is a long-exposure photograph taken in darkness in the late evening; during the exposure, the photographer, John Masterson, walked around the dishes firing off over 130 flashes using a hand-held flash gun. More selected pictures Image 13 GameCubePhoto: Evan Amos The GameCube is a sixth generation video game console released by Nintendo beginning in 2001. Meant as a successor to the Nintendo 64, the GameCube sold approximately 22 million units worldwide. It was the third most-successful console of its generation, behind Sony's PlayStation 2 and Microsoft's Xbox. The GameCube was succeeded by the Wii in 2006. More selected pictures Image 14 M198 howitzerPhoto credit: L Cpl. Samantha L. Jones, USMC Nine Marines from Mike Battery, 4th Battalion, 14th Marines operate the 155mm M198 howitzer in November 2004. The battery was based at Camp Fallujah, Iraq and was supporting Operation Phantom Fury. All nine members of the M198 crew are present. More selected pictures Image 15 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 16 NesjavellirPhoto credit: Gretar Ívarsson The Nesjavellir geothermal power plant, located near Þingvellir, Iceland is the largest of five such plants in the country. Because of the high concentration of volcanoes in Iceland, geothermal energy is so inexpensive that in the wintertime, some pavements in Reykjavík and Akureyri are heated. More selected pictures Image 17 New York City SubwayMap: CountZ A transit map of the New York City Subway, one of the oldest and most extensive public transportation systems in the world. Operated by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority of the State of New York, it has 468 stations in operation on 209 mi (337 km) of routes, with 842 miles (1,355 km) of track. It is the busiest rapid transit rail system by annual ridership in the Western Hemisphere, and fifth busiest in the world. Its stations are located throughout the boroughs of Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx. Staten Island has its own rail line which is not part of the system, but is included in the map as well. More selected pictures Image 18 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 19 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 20 Nice tramwayPhotograph: Myrabella The Nice tramway crossing Place Garibaldi, Nice, where it lowers its pantograph and is powered by batteries. This 8.7-kilometre (5.4 mi), single-line tramway is operated by Veolia Transdev. It opened on 24 November 2007, replacing bus lines 1, 2, 5 and 18. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Wu Ziliang developed the technology to separate uranium-235 for China's first nuclear bomb? ... that racing driver James Sofronas worked as a salesman for a technology company to buy the Nissan NX 2000 required for his first competitive race? ... that when Chorus Systèmes SA was founded in 1986, French technology start-up companies were rare? ... that while Caltech's historic South Houses were renovated, its North Houses were recommended for demolition for lack of architectural appeal? ... that Kosrae State Museum used virtual reality technology to inspire interest in the state's heritage from local stakeholders and members of the Kosraean diaspora? ... that while raising two young children, Li Minhua became the first woman to earn a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at MIT? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. As of November 2021, Musk is the richest person in the world with an estimated net worth of over US$250 billion. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 State Route 257 (SR 257, OH 257) is a 26.19-mile (42.15 km) north - south state highway in the central portion of the U.S. state of Ohio. The highway's southern terminus is in the northwestern Columbus suburb of Dublin at a roundabout intersection with U.S. Route 33 (US 33) and SR 161. This mainly two-lane highway follows the eastern side of the Scioto River from Dublin to its junction with US 42. After crossing over the river with the U.S. highway, SR 257 parallels the river's western bank. SR 257 has its northern terminus at a T-intersection with SR 47 on the western village limits of Prospect. SR 257 was created in 1926, and extended in 1935 and 1937. (Full article...) Image 2 King's Cross St. Pancras is a London Underground station on Euston Road in the Borough of Camden, Central London. It serves King's Cross and St Pancras main line stations in fare zone 1, and is an interchange between six Underground lines. The station was one of the first to open on the network; as of 2021, it is the most used station on the network for passenger entrances and exits combined. The station opened in 1863 as part of the Metropolitan Railway, subsequently catering for the Hammersmith & City and Circle lines. It was expanded in 1868 with the opening of the City Widened Lines, and the Northern and Piccadilly platforms opened in the early 20th century. During the 1930s and 1940s, the station was restructured and partially rebuilt to cater for expanded traffic. The Victoria line connection opened in 1968. The 1987 King's Cross fire that killed 31 people is one of the deadliest accidents to occur on the Underground and resulted in widespread safety improvements and changes throughout the network. The station was extensively rebuilt in the early 21st century to cater for Eurostar services that moved from Waterloo to St Pancras, reopening in 2007. (Full article...) Image 3 Lexus (????, Rekusasu) is the luxury vehicle division of the Japanese automaker Toyota. The Lexus brand is marketed in more than 70 countries and territories worldwide and is Japan's largest-selling make of premium cars. It has ranked among the 10 largest Japanese global brands in market value. Lexus is headquartered in Nagoya, Japan. Operational centers are located in Brussels, Belgium, and Plano, Texas, United States. Created at around the same time as Japanese rivals Honda and Nissan created their Acura and Infiniti luxury divisions respectively, Lexus originated from a corporate project to develop a new premium sedan, code-named F1, which began in 1983 and culminated in the launch of the Lexus LS in 1989. Subsequently, the division added sedan, coupé, convertible and SUV models. Lexus did not exist as a brand in its home market until 2005, and all vehicles marketed internationally as Lexus from 1989 to 2005 were released in Japan under the Toyota marque and an equivalent model name. In 2005, a hybrid version of the RX crossover debuted and additional hybrid models later joined the division's lineup. Lexus launched its own F marque performance division in 2007 with the debut of the IS F sport sedan, followed by the LFA supercar in 2009. (Full article...) Image 4 Telephone cable containing multiple twisted-pair lines The primary line constants are parameters that describe the characteristics of conductive transmission lines, such as pairs of copper wires, in terms of the physical electrical properties of the line. The primary line constants are only relevant to transmission lines and are to be contrasted with the secondary line constants, which can be derived from them, and are more generally applicable. The secondary line constants can be used, for instance, to compare the characteristics of a waveguide to a copper line, whereas the primary constants have no meaning for a waveguide. The constants are conductor resistance and inductance, and insulator capacitance and conductance, which are by convention given the symbols R, L, C, and G respectively. The constants are enumerated in terms of per unit length. The circuit representation of these elements requires a distributed-element model and consequently calculus must be used to analyse the circuit. The analysis yields a system of two first order, simultaneous linear partial differential equations which may be combined to derive the secondary constants of characteristic impedance and propagation constant. (Full article...) Image 5 New York State Route 9L (NY 9L) is a state highway in Warren County, New York, in the United States. The road is 18.58 miles (29.90 km) long and is a suffixed highway of U.S. Route 9 (US 9). NY 9L goes through three municipalities in Warren County: the city of Glens Falls, the town of Queensbury and the town of Lake George. It starts at an intersection with US 9 and NY 32 in Glens Falls and ends at a junction with US 9 and NY 9N in Lake George. NY 9L is a scenic route for people traveling to Lake George as the road provides many views of the lake. The route was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York along the path of an old military road originally built during the American Revolution. (Full article...) Image 6 A selfie of Kottmann in 2021 Tillie Kottmann (born August 7, 1999), also known as deletescape, is a Swiss developer and computer hacker. Kottmann worked in information technology as a teenager, becoming the founding developer of a popular application launcher for Android. She is known for having leaked source code and other data from companies such as Intel and Nissan and was part of a group that hacked into Verkada in March 2021 and accessed more than 150,000 cameras. Kottmann has cited anarchism, anti-capitalism, and her opposition to the concept of intellectual property as the motives for her hacking. In March 2021, Kottmann was indicted by a grand jury in the United States on criminal charges related to her alleged hacking activity between 2019 and 2021. The charges were unrelated to the hack of Verkada. Her home and her parents' home were raided by the Swiss police at the request of United States authorities, and her electronic devices were seized. People used the hashtag "#freetillie" to express support for Kottmann in the aftermath of the raid, and the Swiss magazine Republik compared her to Jeremy Hammond and Aaron Swartz. (Full article...) Image 7 Northbound R train arriving at the station 77th Street is a station on the BMT Fourth Avenue Line of the New York City Subway. Located at 77th Street and Fourth Avenue in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, it is served by the R train at all times. The 77th Street station was constructed as part of the Fourth Avenue Line, which was approved in 1905 and subsequently modified. Construction on the segment of the line that includes 77th Street started on January 24, 1913, and was completed in 1915. The station opened on January 15, 1916, as part of an extension of the BMT Fourth Avenue Line from 59th Street to 86th Street. The station's platforms were lengthened in 1926–1927 and in 1968-1970. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 2 WindmillPhoto credit: Michael Reeve Pitstone Windmill, believed to be the oldest windmill in the British Isles A windmill is an engine powered by wind energy. In Europe, windmills have been used since the Middle Ages. They were developed from the 12th century, apparently from technology gained by crusaders who came into contact with windmills in the Middle East. Persian sources indicate windmill use as early as the 7th century BC. In the United States, the development of water-pumping windmills was a major factor in allowing the farming of vast areas of North America. More selected pictures Image 3 Sukhoi Superjet 100Photograph: Katsuhiko Tokunaga/SuperJet International The Sukhoi Superjet 100 is a modern fly-by-wire twin-engine regional jet with 8 to 108 passenger seats. Development began in 2000; the aircraft had its maiden flight on 19 May 2008 and entered commercial service on 21 April 2011. This aircraft is seen flying off the coast of Italy near Sanremo. More selected pictures Image 4 RiggerPhoto credit: Alfred T. Palmer "Big Pete" Ramagos, rigger at work on Douglas Dam, Tennessee, June 1942. A rigger is a person or company which specializes in the lifting and/or moving of extremely large and/or heavy objects. Riggers use equipment expressly designed for moving and lifting objects where ordinary material handling equipment cannot go. More selected pictures Image 5 Union Pacific 844Photo: Drew Jacksich; edit: Bruce1ee Union Pacific 844 at Painted Rocks, Nevada, on a run from Elko to Sparks, on September 15, 2009. Built in 1944, it was the last steam locomotive delivered to Union Pacific and is the only steam locomotive never retired by a North American Class I railroad. More selected pictures Image 6 Apple Bandai PippinPhotograph: Evan Amos The Apple Bandai Pippin is a multimedia technology console designed by Apple Computer based on the Apple Pippin platform, and produced by Bandai. Only 100,000 of the consoles were produced between its 1996 release and 1997 discontinuation. The Bandai Pippin was intended to create an inexpensive computer aimed mostly at playing CD-based multimedia software, especially games, but also functioning as a thin client. More selected pictures Image 7 Kitty JoynerPhotograph: NACA Kitty Joyner (1916–1993) was an American electrical engineer with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), and then the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). She was hired in 1939 as the organization's first woman engineer, shortly after she had become the first woman to graduate from the University of Virginia's engineering program. More selected pictures Image 8 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 9 Parabolic antennaPhoto credit: Richard Bartz A parabolic antenna, a high-gain reflector antenna used for radio, television and data communications, at Erdfunkstelle Raisting, the largest facility for satellite communication in the world, based in Raisting, Bavaria, Germany. Parabolic antennas work by reflecting electromagnetic radiation off the paraboloid dish to or from the feed horn (center), for reception or transmission respectively. More selected pictures Image 10 Empire State BuildingImage credit: Lewis Hine A structural worker bolts beams on the framework during the construction of the Empire State Building in New York City. The 1,250-foot (380 m) building opened on May 1, 1931, at the time the tallest building in the world, overtaking the Chrysler Building (seen to the right), which had just been completed the year before. The addition of a pinnacle and antennas later increased its overall height to 1,472 feet (449 m). More selected pictures Image 11 MicrometerPhotograph: Lucasbosch A micrometer is a device incorporating a calibrated screw, widely used for precise measurement of components in mechanical engineering and machining. Micrometers are usually, but not always, in the form of calipers (opposing ends joined by a frame). The spindle is a very accurately machined screw and the object to be measured is placed between the spindle and the anvil. The spindle is moved by turning the ratchet knob or thimble until the object to be measured is lightly touched by both the spindle and the anvil. More selected pictures Image 12 Australia Telescope Compact ArrayPhotograph credit: John Masterson, CSIRO; restored by Bammesk The Australia Telescope Compact Array is a radio telescope operated by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) at the Paul Wild Observatory, 25 km (16 mi) west of the town of Narrabri in New South Wales, Australia. The telescope is an array of six identical dishes each 22 metres (72 ft) in diameter, which commonly operate in aperture synthesis mode to produce images from radio waves. Five of the dishes can be moved along a 3-kilometre (2 mi) railway track; the sixth is situated three kilometres west of the end of the main track. Each dish weighs about 270 tonnes (270 long tons; 300 short tons). This photograph, showing five of the Australia Telescope Compact Array's dishes, was taken around 1984, in the late phase of the construction process. It is a long-exposure photograph taken in darkness in the late evening; during the exposure, the photographer, John Masterson, walked around the dishes firing off over 130 flashes using a hand-held flash gun. More selected pictures Image 13 GameCubePhoto: Evan Amos The GameCube is a sixth generation video game console released by Nintendo beginning in 2001. Meant as a successor to the Nintendo 64, the GameCube sold approximately 22 million units worldwide. It was the third most-successful console of its generation, behind Sony's PlayStation 2 and Microsoft's Xbox. The GameCube was succeeded by the Wii in 2006. More selected pictures Image 14 M198 howitzerPhoto credit: L Cpl. Samantha L. Jones, USMC Nine Marines from Mike Battery, 4th Battalion, 14th Marines operate the 155mm M198 howitzer in November 2004. The battery was based at Camp Fallujah, Iraq and was supporting Operation Phantom Fury. All nine members of the M198 crew are present. More selected pictures Image 15 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 16 NesjavellirPhoto credit: Gretar Ívarsson The Nesjavellir geothermal power plant, located near Þingvellir, Iceland is the largest of five such plants in the country. Because of the high concentration of volcanoes in Iceland, geothermal energy is so inexpensive that in the wintertime, some pavements in Reykjavík and Akureyri are heated. More selected pictures Image 17 New York City SubwayMap: CountZ A transit map of the New York City Subway, one of the oldest and most extensive public transportation systems in the world. Operated by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority of the State of New York, it has 468 stations in operation on 209 mi (337 km) of routes, with 842 miles (1,355 km) of track. It is the busiest rapid transit rail system by annual ridership in the Western Hemisphere, and fifth busiest in the world. Its stations are located throughout the boroughs of Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx. Staten Island has its own rail line which is not part of the system, but is included in the map as well. More selected pictures Image 18 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 19 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 20 Nice tramwayPhotograph: Myrabella The Nice tramway crossing Place Garibaldi, Nice, where it lowers its pantograph and is powered by batteries. This 8.7-kilometre (5.4 mi), single-line tramway is operated by Veolia Transdev. It opened on 24 November 2007, replacing bus lines 1, 2, 5 and 18. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Wu Ziliang developed the technology to separate uranium-235 for China's first nuclear bomb? ... that racing driver James Sofronas worked as a salesman for a technology company to buy the Nissan NX 2000 required for his first competitive race? ... that when Chorus Systèmes SA was founded in 1986, French technology start-up companies were rare? ... that while Caltech's historic South Houses were renovated, its North Houses were recommended for demolition for lack of architectural appeal? ... that Kosrae State Museum used virtual reality technology to inspire interest in the state's heritage from local stakeholders and members of the Kosraean diaspora? ... that while raising two young children, Li Minhua became the first woman to earn a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at MIT? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. As of November 2021, Musk is the richest person in the world with an estimated net worth of over US$250 billion. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 Røst Airport (Norwegian: Røst lufthavn; IATA: RET, ICAO: ENRS) is a regional airport serving Røst Municipality in Nordland county, Norway. The airport is located on the northern edge of the main island of Røstlandet, just north of the main village of Røstlandet. It is owned and operated by the state-owned Avinor and handled 9,889 passengers in 2014. Services are provided by Widerøe, operating Dash 8-100 aircraft on contract with the Ministry of Transport and Communications to Bodø Airport and Leknes Airport. Røst was first served using seaplanes from the 1960s, and then by helicopters from 1970. Røst Airport opened on 1 June 1986, initially with Widerøe operating de Havilland Canada Twin Otters. From 2000 to 2001 the service was operated by Guard Air, and from 2003 to 2008 by Kato Air; otherwise Widerøe has flown the route. (Full article...) Image 2 King's Highway 64, commonly referred to as Highway 64, is a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario, connecting Highway 69 north of the French River with Highway 11 at Marten River, via Highway 17 west of Sturgeon Falls. The route serves several communities along the north shore of the French River and west shore of Lake Nipissing as it travels from Highway 69 to Highway 17. North of Sturgeon Falls, the highway provides a shortcut between Highway 17 and Highway 11 northwest of North Bay. Highway 64 was first assumed in 1937, the year that the Ontario Department of Highways (DHO) merged with the Department of Northern Development (DND) and began assigning route numbers in northern Ontario. It initially connected only Highway 17 and Highway 11, as Highway 69 was not completed through French River until after World War II. In 1956, the route was extended southwest to Rutter via Noëlville to meet Highway 69, establishing the route as it exists today. (Full article...) Image 3 Mississippi Highway 23 (MS 23) is a state highway in Mississippi. The route starts at MS 25 in the town of Smithville. It travels northeastward through the forests of eastern Itawamba County. The highway intersects Interstate 22 (I-22) and U.S. Route 78 (US 78) in Tremont. MS 23 ends at the Mississippi–Alabama state line, just west of Red Bay. The routing that became part of MS 23 was first constructed as a graded road in 1925, from north of Amory to the state line. Gravel was added to sections of the route in the 1930s. The designation was added to maps around 1950, and it was extended to Smithville in 1960. The route was fully paved by 1980. (Full article...) Image 4 Mississippi Highway 902 (MS 902, also known as MS 35 Connector) is a state highway in central Mississippi. The route starts at MS 481 in Burns and it travels northeastwards. It travels within the Bienville National Forest and it ends at MS 35 in Lorena. The road was constructed around 1967 and was paved by 1968. The route was signed as MS 902 on state maps by 1998. (Full article...) Image 5 Northbound R train arriving at the station 77th Street is a station on the BMT Fourth Avenue Line of the New York City Subway. Located at 77th Street and Fourth Avenue in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, it is served by the R train at all times. The 77th Street station was constructed as part of the Fourth Avenue Line, which was approved in 1905 and subsequently modified. Construction on the segment of the line that includes 77th Street started on January 24, 1913, and was completed in 1915. The station opened on January 15, 1916, as part of an extension of the BMT Fourth Avenue Line from 59th Street to 86th Street. The station's platforms were lengthened in 1926–1927 and in 1968-1970. (Full article...) Image 6 Mississippi Highway 600 (MS 600) was a state highway in southern Mississippi. The route started at U.S. Route 11 (US 11) in Carriere and traveled eastward. The road crossed from Pearl River County to Hancock County and continued east until it reached MS 603 in Necaise. MS 600 was designated around 1958 from the Pearl River–Hancock county line to MS 603, and it was extended to US 11 by 1960. The route was removed from the state highway system by 1967. (Full article...) Image 7 The hijacked aircraft in 1982 Braathen SAFE Flight 139 was an aircraft hijacking that occurred in Norway on 21 June 1985. The incident took place on a Boeing 737-205 belonging to Braathens SAFE that was on a scheduled flight from Trondheim Airport, Værnes to Oslo Airport, Fornebu. The hijacker was Stein Arvid Huseby, who was drunk during most of the incident. It was the first plane hijacking to take place in Norway; there were no deaths and no injuries. Huseby was sentenced to three years' imprisonment and five years' detention. Armed with an air gun, Huseby threatened a cabin attendant and told the captain to proceed as planned to Fornebu. He claimed (falsely) to have placed explosives on board. His demands were to make a political statement and talk to Prime Minister Kåre Willoch and Minister of Justice Mona Røkke. The plane landed at 15:30 at Fornebu and was surrounded by the police. After one hour, Huseby released 70 hostages in exchange for having the aircraft being moved closer to the terminal building. Thirty minutes later, Huseby released the remaining passengers. He drank throughout the incident, and at 17:30, after he consumed the plane's beer supply, he surrendered his weapon in exchange for more beer. The plane was immediately stormed and Huseby arrested. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 Soyuz MSDiagram credit: AstroBidules The Soyuz MS is the latest revision of the Russian spacecraft series Soyuz. It is an evolution of the Soyuz TMA-M, with modernization mostly concentrated on its communications and navigation subsystems. The spacecraft is used by Roscosmos for human spaceflight. The Soyuz MS has minimal external changes with respect to the Soyuz TMA-M, mostly limited to antennas and sensors, as well as the thruster placement. The first launch, Soyuz MS-01, took place on 7 July 2016 aboard a Soyuz-FG launch vehicle towards the International Space Station. This exploded-view diagram illustrates and labels various components of the Soyuz MS spacecraft and the Soyuz-FG rocket. More selected pictures Image 2 George Washington CarverPhoto: Arthur Rothstein; Restoration: Lise Broer A portrait of George Washington Carver, American scientist, botanist, educator and inventor, from 1942. Much of Carver's fame is based on his research into and promotion of alternative crops to cotton, such as peanuts and sweet potatoes. In addition to his work on agricultural extension education for purposes of advocacy of sustainable agriculture and appreciation of plants and nature, Carver's important accomplishments also included improvement of racial relations, mentoring children, poetry, painting, and religion. One of his most important roles was in undermining, through the fame of his achievements and many talents, the widespread stereotype of the time that the black race was intellectually inferior to the white race. More selected pictures Image 3 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 4 Stockwell GaragePhotograph: David Iliff An interior view of Stockwell Garage, a large bus garage in Stockwell, London, designed by Adie, Button and Partners and opened in 1952. The 393-foot-long (120 m) roof structure, seen here, is supported by ten very shallow "two-hinged" arched ribs, between which are cantilevered barrel vaults topped by large skylights. The garage, which could originally hold 200 buses, has been a Grade II* Listed Building since 1988. More selected pictures Image 5 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 6 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 7 George Washington CarverPhotograph credit: Unknown; restored by Adam Cuerden George Washington Carver (1860s–1943) was an American agricultural scientist and inventor. Born into slavery in Diamond, Missouri, he was raised by his master Moses Carver after being emancipated, having been separated from his parents as an infant during a kidnapping incident. After college, Carver became a professor at Tuskegee Institute, where he developed techniques to improve soils depleted by repeated plantings of cotton. He wanted poor farmers to grow alternative crops, such as peanuts and sweet potatoes, as a source of their own food and to improve their quality of life. Carver spent years developing and promoting products made from peanuts, although none became commercially successful. Apart from his work to improve the lives of farmers, he was also a leader in promoting environmentalism. Carver received numerous honors for his work, including the NAACP's Spingarn Medal. In an era of very high racial polarization, his fame reached beyond the black community; he was widely recognized and praised in the white community for his many achievements and talents. In 1941, Time magazine dubbed Carver a "black Leonardo". This picture of Carver was taken around 1910 and is in the collection of the Tuskegee University archives. More selected pictures Image 8 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 9 SOCATA TBMPhotograph credit: Michael Mainiero The SOCATA TBM (now Daher TBM) is a family of high-performance single-engine turboprop business and utility light aircraft manufactured by Daher. This SOCATA TBM 900 was photographed in flight during the 2015 EAA AirVenture Oshkosh airshow in the U.S. state of Wisconsin. The aircraft features a Pratt & Whitney Canada PT6A-64 engine, and a five-blade carbon-fiber propeller, which increases performance and decreases cabin noise. In a passenger configuration, the pressurized cabin is typically fitted with highly finished interiors, featuring luxury materials such as leather and wood veneers. More selected pictures Image 10 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 11 WindmillPhoto credit: Michael Reeve Pitstone Windmill, believed to be the oldest windmill in the British Isles A windmill is an engine powered by wind energy. In Europe, windmills have been used since the Middle Ages. They were developed from the 12th century, apparently from technology gained by crusaders who came into contact with windmills in the Middle East. Persian sources indicate windmill use as early as the 7th century BC. In the United States, the development of water-pumping windmills was a major factor in allowing the farming of vast areas of North America. More selected pictures Image 12 Red telephone boxPhotograph: Christoph Braun A 'K6' model red telephone box outside of St Paul's Cathedral in London. These kiosks for a public telephone were designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott and painted "currant red" for easy visibility. Although such telephone boxes ceased production when the KX series was introduced in 1985, they remain a common sight in Britain and some of its colonies, and are considered a British cultural icon. More selected pictures Image 13 Mary JacksonPhotograph credit: Langley Research Center; restored by Adam Cuerden Mary Jackson (1921–2005) was an African American mathematician and aerospace engineer at the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, which was succeeded by NASA in 1958. For most of her career, she worked at Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia; starting as a computer at the segregated West Area Computing division, she later took advanced engineering classes and, in 1958, became NASA's first black female engineer. After 34 years at NASA, Jackson had earned the most senior engineering title available. Realizing that she could not earn further promotions without becoming a supervisor, she accepted a demotion to become a manager of the Federal Women's Program in the NASA Office of Equal Opportunity Programs, as well as of the Affirmative Action Program. In this role, she worked to influence both the hiring and promotion of women in NASA's science, engineering and mathematics careers. She was portrayed by Janelle Monáe as a lead character in the 2016 film Hidden Figures. This picture, taken in 1980, shows Jackson working at NASA Langley. More selected pictures Image 14 RiggerPhoto credit: Alfred T. Palmer "Big Pete" Ramagos, rigger at work on Douglas Dam, Tennessee, June 1942. A rigger is a person or company which specializes in the lifting and/or moving of extremely large and/or heavy objects. Riggers use equipment expressly designed for moving and lifting objects where ordinary material handling equipment cannot go. More selected pictures Image 15 Thomas EdisonPhoto: Bachrach Studios; Restoration: Michel Vuijlsteke Thomas Edison (1847–1931) was an American inventor, scientist and businessman who developed many devices that greatly influenced life around the world, including the phonograph, the motion picture camera, and a long-lasting, practical electric light bulb. Dubbed "The Wizard of Menlo Park" (now Edison, New Jersey) by a newspaper reporter, he was one of the first inventors to apply the principles of mass production and large teamwork to the process of invention, and therefore is often credited with the creation of the first industrial research laboratory. Edison is considered one of the most prolific inventors in history, holding 1,093 U.S. patents in his name, as well as many patents in the United Kingdom, France and Germany. More selected pictures Image 16 WindmillsPhotograph: Uberprutser A windmill is a mill that converts the energy of wind into rotational energy by means of vanes called sails or blades. Traditional windmills were often used to mill grain, pump water, or both. Most modern windmills take the form of wind turbines used to generate electricity, or windpumps used to pump water, either for land drainage or to extract groundwater. Here, the smock mill Goliath is viewed in front of the wind farm Growind in Eemshaven in the Netherlands. More selected pictures Image 17 William CrooksPhotograph: National Photo Company, Restoration: Adam Cuerden The William Crooks is a 4-4-0 steam locomotive that was the first locomotive to operate in the U.S. state of Minnesota, beginning in 1861. It was named after William Crooks, the chief mechanical engineer for the St. Paul and Pacific Railroad, who earlier served as a colonel in the 6th Minnesota Volunteer Infantry Regiment during the American Civil War. Crooks laid out the initial ten-mile track between Minneapolis and St. Paul on which the locomotive operated. It was retired from regular service in 1897, but operated special services for several further decades. It is now in the Lake Superior Railroad Museum in Duluth. More selected pictures Image 18 STS-119Photo: NASA This photo of the International Space Station (ISS) was taken during STS-119, a Space Shuttle mission that delivered and assembled the fourth starboard Integrated Truss Segment, and the final set of solar arrays and batteries to the station. Construction of the ISS is still ongoing and is scheduled to complete in December 2011. More selected pictures Image 19 Movable typePhoto credit: Willi Heidelbach A composing stick and movable type, the system of printing and typography using pieces of metal type, made by casting from matrices struck by letterpunches. The text on the stick reads, "The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog and feels as if he were in the seventh heaven of typography together with Hermann Zapf, the most famous artist of the" [sic]. More selected pictures Image 20 Empire State BuildingImage credit: Lewis Hine A structural worker bolts beams on the framework during the construction of the Empire State Building in New York City. The 1,250-foot (380 m) building opened on May 1, 1931, at the time the tallest building in the world, overtaking the Chrysler Building (seen to the right), which had just been completed the year before. The addition of a pinnacle and antennas later increased its overall height to 1,472 feet (449 m). More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that the National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management has conducted research to improve the taste and nutrition of a children's dietary supplement distributed by the government of Kerala? ... that Alejandro Finocchiaro, Argentina's current Minister of Education, Culture, Science and Technology, produced the 2008 documentary Mujeres de la Shoá ('Women of the Holocaust')? ... that Munster Technological University, scheduled to open in 2021, will be only the second university of its type in Ireland? ... that minimalist city-building game Islanders deliberately omits features such as resource accumulation and technology research in order to focus on the core mechanic of building placement? ... that Romanian neuroscientist Viviana Gradinaru was part of the research team from Caltech that found that serotonin is necessary for sleep in zebrafish and mice? ... that racing driver James Sofronas worked as a salesman for a technology company to buy the Nissan NX 2000 required for his first competitive race? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. As of November 2021, Musk is the richest person in the world with an estimated net worth of over US$250 billion. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 Delaware Route 20 (DE 20) is an east–west state highway in Sussex County, Delaware. Its western terminus is the Maryland state line in Reliance, where it continues as Maryland Route 392 (MD 392). Its eastern terminus is DE 54 west of Fenwick Island. The route runs through rural areas of Sussex County and passes through the towns of Seaford, Millsboro, and Dagsboro. DE 20 intersects U.S. Route 13 (US 13) in Seaford, US 9 in Hardscrabble, US 113 and DE 24/DE 30 in Millsboro, DE 26 in Dagsboro, and DE 17 in Roxana. DE 20 was originally created by 1936 to run from the Maryland border east to US 113 in Millsboro. By 1970, it was realigned to bypass Seaford. The route was extended east to DE 1 in Fenwick Island by 1994; however, the eastern terminus was cut back to DE 54 in 2005 to avoid the concurrency with that route. (Full article...) Image 2 The dam wall and spillway The Canning Dam and reservoir provide a major fresh water resource for the city of Perth, Western Australia. The dam is situated on the Darling Scarp and is an impoundment of the Canning River. It is noted for its innovative structural and hydraulic design that was considered to be at the forefront of concrete gravity dam design at the time of construction. The Canning Dam was Perth's primary water supply up until the 1960s when other sources of fresh water were tapped. Currently the dam supplies approximately 20 percent of Perth's fresh water. Inflow into the Canning Reservoir is estimated to be 22 gigalitres (0.78 billion cubic feet) and has a storage capacity of 90.352 gigalitres (3.1908 billion cubic feet). Since its completion in 1940, the Canning Dam has contributed to a wide range of environmental and ecological problems in surrounding regions, problems include more common algal blooms, habitat loss and sedimentation. Despite these issues, Canning Dam and the adjacent parks and forests provide a variety of recreational activities for the public such as bushwalking, historic walks and picnic facilities. (Full article...) Image 3 Delaware Route 36 (DE 36) is a state highway in Sussex County, Delaware. It runs in a generally northeast–southwest direction from DE 404 in Scotts Corner to Slaughter Beach, a town along the Delaware Bay. The road runs through the northern portion of Sussex County, passing through rural areas along with Greenwood and Milford. The route intersects DE 16 and U.S. Route 13 (US 13) in Greenwood and US 113, DE 1 Business (DE 1 Bus.), and DE 1 in Milford. DE 36 was built as a state highway in stages during the 1920s and 1930s. The road was designated by 1938 from DE 16 east of Greenwood to Fort Saulsbury (present-day Slaughter Beach) and was extended west to DE 404 by 1994. (Full article...) Image 4 Color Air AS was the first Norwegian low-cost airline. It operated from Oslo Airport, Gardermoen in 1998 and 1999 with a fleet of three Boeing 737-300 aircraft. Color Air was a brand extension of Color Line, which shared a common owner in the Olav Nils Sunde-controlled Color Group. The airline operated five daily round trips from Oslo to Trondheim and Bergen, four to Ålesund and one to London, in addition to a weekly trip to Alicante. Color Air pioneered the low-cost business model in Norway, with a denser seating, no frills and lack of a frequent flyer program. Tickets were sold only via the Internet, by telephone or in supermarkets; when bought from travel agents, there was a 200 kr surcharge. The airline was established in response to the opening of Gardermoen, which would allow any airline sufficient landing slots to compete with the incumbents Braathens and Scandinavian Airlines (SAS). Color Air commenced operations on 1 August 1998, with the two other airlines moving from Oslo Airport, Fornebu on 8 October. Following the airline's establishment, a price war broke out between it and the two incumbents. All three increased capacity and dropped prices, giving a 40% increase in seats on the dominant domestic routes and seat loads of between 30 and 50 percent. After thirteen months and NOK 400 million in losses, Color Air gave up and filed for bankruptcy. The price war cost the three airlines more than NOK 3 billion, and ultimately forced the other two to merge. (Full article...) Image 5 US Highway 127 (US 127) is a part of the United States Numbered Highway System that runs from Chattanooga, Tennessee, to the Lower Peninsula of Michigan. In Michigan, it is a state trunkline highway that runs for 214.17 miles (344.67 km), entering from Ohio south of Hudson and ending at a partial interchange with Interstate 75 (I-75) south of Grayling. US 127 is the primary route connecting Lansing and Central Michigan to Northern Michigan and the Mackinac Bridge. From the south side of Jackson northerly, it is mostly a four-lane freeway. A notable exception is a 16-mile (26 km) stretch from north of St. Johns to just south of Ithaca, where the highway is built as an expressway and speed limits are lower. South of Jackson to the state line, the trunkline is a two-lane, undivided highway with access from adjacent properties. The highway was first designated on November 11, 1926, along a series of existing state highways from Lansing southward toward Toledo. In 1930, the southern end was rerouted south of Somerset in rural northwestern Lenawee County to a course that ran directly south to the Ohio state line; the remainder was renumbered US 223. Starting in the 1950s, the highway was reconfigured to bypass Mason and other communities, converting US 127 into a freeway from Jackson to the Lansing area by the mid-1970s. When the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) successfully petitioned the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) in 1999 to remove US 27 from the state, US 127 was to be extended northward from Lansing to Grayling as the replacement designation. This change was made in 2002, resulting in the current configuration of the highway in Michigan. The United States Congress has designated an additional Interstate Highway, to be part of I-73, that would replace most or all of US 127 through Central and Southern Michigan, but any plans by MDOT to complete this highway were cancelled in 2001. (Full article...) Image 6 Paterson's worms are a family of cellular automata devised in 1971 by Mike Paterson and John Horton Conway to model the behaviour and feeding patterns of certain prehistoric worms. In the model, a worm moves between points on a triangular grid along line segments, representing food. Its turnings are determined by the configuration of eaten and uneaten line segments adjacent to the point at which the worm currently is. Despite being governed by simple rules the behaviour of the worms can be extremely complex, and the ultimate fate of one variant is still unknown. The worms were studied in the early 1970s by Paterson, Conway and Michael Beeler, described by Beeler in June 1973, and presented in November 1973 in Martin Gardner's "Mathematical Games" column in Scientific American. (Full article...) Image 7 Chrysler 160 The Chrysler 180 was the base name for a series of large saloon cars produced by Chrysler Europe. Resulting from joining development efforts of Rootes Group and Simca, the car was produced from 1970 to 1975 in Poissy, France, and later in Chrysler's subsidiary Barreiros' factory in Spain. The Chrysler 180 was also the base for the medium-sized model built by Chrysler Australia, the Chrysler Centura. Depending on engine employed, the cars were marketed as Chrysler 160/180/2 litre, and since 1977 in France and rest of continental Europe as Chrysler-Simca 1609/1610/2 litres. After the takeover of Chrysler Europe by PSA Peugeot Citroën, the continental Europe models were renamed Talbot 1610/2 litres for 1979 and 1980 model years, after which the model was discontinued in Europe save for Spain, where a diesel model was sold until 1982. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 2 Soyuz MSDiagram credit: AstroBidules The Soyuz MS is the latest revision of the Russian spacecraft series Soyuz. It is an evolution of the Soyuz TMA-M, with modernization mostly concentrated on its communications and navigation subsystems. The spacecraft is used by Roscosmos for human spaceflight. The Soyuz MS has minimal external changes with respect to the Soyuz TMA-M, mostly limited to antennas and sensors, as well as the thruster placement. The first launch, Soyuz MS-01, took place on 7 July 2016 aboard a Soyuz-FG launch vehicle towards the International Space Station. This exploded-view diagram illustrates and labels various components of the Soyuz MS spacecraft and the Soyuz-FG rocket. More selected pictures Image 3 CaliperImage credit: Joaquim Alves Gaspar An animation showing how to use a vernier caliper, which is a caliper that uses a vernier scale to interpolate linear measurements. Vernier calipers can measure internal and external dimensions using, respectively, the uppermost and lower jaws, and also depths, using the depth probe (located at the right end). In this example, the first two digits (2.4) are decided by the location of the zero of the vernier scale in the centimeter scale, and the last digit (0.07), by the first line of the vernier scale that exactly matches a line of the centimeter scale above. More selected pictures Image 4 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 5 Brusio spiral viaductPhoto: David Gubler The Bernina Express passing over the Brusio spiral viaduct. Located near Brusio, Graubünden, Switzerland, the single track nine-arched stone spiral railway viaduct was opened in 1908. It is part of the World Heritage-listed Bernina railway. More selected pictures Image 6 WindmillsPhotograph: Uberprutser A windmill is a mill that converts the energy of wind into rotational energy by means of vanes called sails or blades. Traditional windmills were often used to mill grain, pump water, or both. Most modern windmills take the form of wind turbines used to generate electricity, or windpumps used to pump water, either for land drainage or to extract groundwater. Here, the smock mill Goliath is viewed in front of the wind farm Growind in Eemshaven in the Netherlands. More selected pictures Image 7 David FaimanPhotograph: David Shankbone David Faiman is an Israeli engineer and physicist recognized for his expertise on solar power. He is the director of the Ben-Gurion National Solar Energy Center and Chairman of the Department of Solar Energy & Environmental Physics at Ben-Gurion University's Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research in Sde Boker. More selected pictures Image 8 Thomas EdisonPhoto: Bachrach Studios; Restoration: Michel Vuijlsteke Thomas Edison (1847–1931) was an American inventor, scientist and businessman who developed many devices that greatly influenced life around the world, including the phonograph, the motion picture camera, and a long-lasting, practical electric light bulb. Dubbed "The Wizard of Menlo Park" (now Edison, New Jersey) by a newspaper reporter, he was one of the first inventors to apply the principles of mass production and large teamwork to the process of invention, and therefore is often credited with the creation of the first industrial research laboratory. Edison is considered one of the most prolific inventors in history, holding 1,093 U.S. patents in his name, as well as many patents in the United Kingdom, France and Germany. More selected pictures Image 9 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 10 Stockwell GaragePhotograph: David Iliff An interior view of Stockwell Garage, a large bus garage in Stockwell, London, designed by Adie, Button and Partners and opened in 1952. The 393-foot-long (120 m) roof structure, seen here, is supported by ten very shallow "two-hinged" arched ribs, between which are cantilevered barrel vaults topped by large skylights. The garage, which could originally hold 200 buses, has been a Grade II* Listed Building since 1988. More selected pictures Image 11 Paddle steamerDaguerreotype credit: Unknown A daguerreotype from the 1850s of the Ben Campbell, a paddle steamer—a ship or boat driven by a steam engine that uses one or more paddle wheels to develop thrust for propulsion. The paddle wheel was the first form of mechanical propulsion for a boat, but has now been almost entirely superseded by more modern forms of marine propulsion. More selected pictures Image 12 Flat-four enginePhotograph: ULPower Aero Engines The ULPower UL260i, a flat-four engine produced by ULPower Aero Engines of Belgium. Flat-four engines are flat engines with four cylinders arranged horizontally in two banks of two cylinders on each side of a central crankcase; they can be used in cars, motorcycles, or aircraft. This type of engine tends to be well-balanced and have efficient cooling, but is expensive to manufacture and considerably wider than other engines. More selected pictures Image 13 Mechanical advantageImage credit: Prolineserver/Tomia This diagram of four pulley systems illustrates how increasing the number of pulleys increases the mechanical advantage, making the load easier to lift. MA is the factor by which a mechanism multiplies the force put into it. In this diagram, 100 newtons is required to lift the weight off the ground. Each additional pulley increases the MA such that the four-pulley system only needs 25 newtons to accomplish the same task, but the rope must be pulled four times as far. More selected pictures Image 14 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 15 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 16 Burj KhalifaPhotograph: Donald Y Tong Burj Khalifa is a skyscraper in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, and currently the tallest man-made structure in the world, at 829.8 m (2,722 ft). It was designed to be the centerpiece of a large-scale, mixed-use development known as Downtown Dubai. Construction took over five years, and the skyscraper was officially opened in January 2010. More selected pictures Image 17 Pin tumbler lockPhoto credit: Eric Pierce The pin tumbler lock is a lock mechanism that utilizes a group of pins of varying lengths to prevent opening the lock without the correct key. Pin tumblers are most commonly employed in cylinder locks, but may also be found in tubular or radial locks. When the correct key is inserted, the gaps between the key pins (red) and driver pins (blue) align with the edge of the plug (yellow). More selected pictures Image 18 TugboatImage credit: Al2/Lycaon/Jeff Dahl A diagram showing the parts of a tugboat, a boat used to maneuver large ships in harbours, over the open sea, or through rivers and canals. They also tow barges, disabled ships, and oil rigs. Equipped with powerful engines producing thousands of horsepower, extensive rigging equipment, and a fender of tires for protection, tugboats can push or tow large vessels with high precision and speed. More selected pictures Image 19 Red telephone boxPhotograph: Christoph Braun A 'K6' model red telephone box outside of St Paul's Cathedral in London. These kiosks for a public telephone were designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott and painted "currant red" for easy visibility. Although such telephone boxes ceased production when the KX series was introduced in 1985, they remain a common sight in Britain and some of its colonies, and are considered a British cultural icon. More selected pictures Image 20 Thermoplastic-sheathed cablePhotograph credit: Petar Miloševi? A thermoplastic-sheathed cable consists of a toughened outer thermoplastic sheath of polyvinyl chloride, covering one or more individual annealed copper conductors. Each of the current-carrying conductors in the "core" is insulated by an individual thermoplastic sheath, coloured to indicate the purpose of the conductor concerned. The protective earth conductor may also be covered with insulation, although, in some countries, this conductor may be left as bare copper. The type of thermoplastic, the dimensions of the conductors and the colour of their individual insulation are specified by the regulatory bodies in the various countries concerned. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Theresa M. Korn turned down a scholarship to the Carnegie Institute of Technology in order to become the institute's first female engineer? ... that XTC's Oranges & Lemons, released 30 years ago today, reinterpreted 1960s psychedelic music styles using 1980s instrumentation and technology? ... that minimalist city-building game Islanders deliberately omits features such as resource accumulation and technology research in order to focus on the core mechanic of building placement? ... that racing driver James Sofronas worked as a salesman for a technology company to buy the Nissan NX 2000 required for his first competitive race? ... that when Chorus Systèmes SA was founded in 1986, French technology start-up companies were rare? ... that Kosrae State Museum used virtual reality technology to inspire interest in the state's heritage from local stakeholders and members of the Kosraean diaspora? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. As of November 2021, Musk is the richest person in the world with an estimated net worth of over US$250 billion. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 State Route 1002 (SR 1002), locally known as Tilghman Street and Union Boulevard, is a major 13.8 mi (22.2 km) long east–west road in the Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton metropolitan area of the U.S. state of Pennsylvania. The majority of the roadway is the former alignment of U.S. Route 22, maintained by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as a Quadrant Route, and is not signed except on small white segment markers. Tilghman Street begins at Pennsylvania Route 100 in Fogelsville, though SR 1002 continues west on Main Street (also old US 22) to the intersection of Church Street (SR 3014). It becomes Union Boulevard just east of the bridge over the Lehigh River in Allentown; SR 1002 ends at the interchange with Pennsylvania Route 378 in Bethlehem. Union Boulevard continues over Monocacy Creek, which forms the border between Lehigh and Northampton Counties, and ends in downtown Bethlehem. (Full article...) Image 2 Highway 142 (AR 142) is a north–south state highway in Chicot County, Arkansas. The route starts its southern terminus at Levee Road near Lakeport. The road then travels north, passing through the Lakeport Plantation. It ends at its northern terminus at U.S. Route 82 (US 82) and US 278 in Shives. AR 142 was designated in 1931, from US 61 to the Mississippi River, and part of the route was redesignated as part of US 82 in 1940. The route was paved in asphalt by 1962. The route is maintained by the Arkansas Department of Transportation (ArDOT). (Full article...) Image 3 New York State Route 48 (NY 48) is a 28.20-mile (45.38 km) north–south state highway in Central New York in the United States. The southern terminus of the route is located at Interstate 690 (I-690) exit 3 near the interchange between I-690 and the New York State Thruway (I-90) in Van Buren, northwest of Syracuse. The northern terminus is located at an intersection with NY 104 in Oswego. In between, NY 48 passes through the riverside communities of Baldwinsville and Fulton and runs alongside both the Seneca River and Oswego River. For most of its route, NY 48 serves as an alternate route of NY 481. The routes share similar alignments along the Oswego River from the Syracuse area to Oswego, with NY 481 following the eastern riverbank between the two locations. When the route was originally assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York, it extended southward into downtown Syracuse. NY 48 was truncated to Van Buren after I-690 was built over portions of the road in the late 1950s and early 1960s. The portion of former NY 48 that was not supplanted by I-690 was turned over to Onondaga County; however, the state reacquired the segment adjacent to the New York State Fairgrounds in 1980. Around 1931, a suffixed spur of NY 48, New York State Route 48A was designated as an alternate from Oswego to the town of Minetto. The route was deleted from the state highway system around 1940. (Full article...) Image 4 K-95 is an approximately 6.6-mile-long (10.6 km) state highway in the U.S. state of Kansas. K-95's southern terminus is at U.S. Route 83 (US-83) north of Scott City, and the northern terminus is at US-83 south of Elkader. The highway forms a section of the Western Vistas Historic Byway. K-95 travels through mostly rural land, and is a two-lane highway its entire length. Within Lake Scott State Park, just west of K-95, is the El Cuartelejo ruins. It is the remains of a structure thought to have been built by Taos Pueblo Indians who left New Mexico in 1664 to escape Spanish rule. The highway passes about 0.6 miles (970 m) east of the area of the Battle of Punished Woman's Fork, the last Indian battle in the state. The route that K-95 follows was planned to become a state highway in a resolution on July 27, 1966, to link US-83 to Lake Scott and Lake Scott State Park. This alignment was altered in a resolution on May 10, 1967, and was designated as K-95. K-95 first appeared on the 1969 State Highway Map, and its alignment has not changed since. (Full article...) Image 5 The Ebbw Valley Railway (Welsh: Rheilffordd Cwm Ebwy) is a branch line of the South Wales Main Line in South Wales. Transport for Wales Rail provides an hourly passenger service each way, between Ebbw Vale Town and Cardiff Central. Additional Services to Newport are due to commence daily from 12 December at a rate of one per hour in each direction. The line was opened by the Monmouthshire Railway and Canal Company and the Great Western Railway (GWR) operated a passenger service from the 1850s between Newport and Ebbw Vale. The line became part of British Railways Western Region in 1948, following the nationalisation of the railways. Passenger services were withdrawn in 1962. However, the route continued to be used to carry freight to and from the Corus steelworks in Ebbw Vale, until its closure in 2002. Proposals to re-open the existing freight railway line to passenger services were first mooted in 1998. The Welsh Assembly Government announced their commitment to the project in 2002, as part of a package of measures to help the former steel communities. (Full article...) Image 6 Interstate 78 (I-78) is a part of the Interstate Highway System that runs from Union Township, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania, to New York City. In the U.S. state of New York, I-78 extends 0.90 miles (1.45 km). The entirety of I-78 consists of the Holland Tunnel, which crosses under the Hudson River from New Jersey and ends at an exit rotary in Lower Manhattan. The tunnel and its approaches are maintained by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey (PANYNJ). I-78 was planned to take a longer route when the Interstate System within New York City was originally proposed in the late 1950s. The proposed route of I-78 was to head east via the Williamsburg Bridge to John F. Kennedy International Airport and then north over the Throgs Neck Bridge to I-95 in the Bronx. One unbuilt section of I-78, the Lower Manhattan Expressway, would have connected the Holland Tunnel to the Williamsburg and Manhattan Bridges. Another unbuilt section, the Cross-Brooklyn and Bushwick Expressways, would have extended southeast across Brooklyn, connecting to what is now the Nassau Expressway (New York State Route 878 or NY 878). A third section would have connected the Nassau Expressway, at the southern edge of Queens near JFK Airport, to the southern end of what is now I-295, in central Queens. Due to opposition from the communities along the expressways' routes, these sections of I-78 were never built, and I-78 does not connect to I-278 or to any of its other auxiliary routes. (Full article...) Image 7 Glen Parmelee Robinson, Jr. (September 10, 1923 – January 16, 2013), called the "father of high-tech industry in Georgia", was an American businessman and founder of Scientific Atlanta, now a subsidiary of Cisco Systems. Robinson was the first employee of Scientific Atlanta, where he remained CEO then Chairman of the company until he retired. Initially a ham radio enthusiast and subsequently a graduate of the Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech) with both bachelor's and master's degrees in physics, Robinson worked at the Georgia Tech Research Institute and the Oak Ridge National Laboratory before founding Scientific Atlanta. Later in life, he founded and invested in numerous Atlanta-based science-related companies. Robinson was named an IEEE Fellow and held at least 39 patents in fields including solar energy devices and antenna systems. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 Continuous castingPhoto: Alchemist-hp A disc of copper made by continuous casting, the process whereby molten metal is solidified into a "semifinished" state for subsequent rolling in the finishing mills. Continuous casting replaced the creation of ingots using stationary moulds. The process allows lower-cost production of metal sections with better quality, due to the inherently lower costs of continuous, standardised production of a product, as well as providing increased control over the process through automation. After casting, this disc was then etched to achieve its final state. More selected pictures Image 2 Bucket-wheel excavatorsPhotograph: Raimond Spekking Bucket-wheel excavators (BWEs) are heavy equipment used in surface mining. The primary function of a BWE is to act as a continuous digging machine in large-scale open pit mining operations. These BWEs were photographed at the Garzweiler surface mine in Germany. More selected pictures Image 3 Sukhoi Su-30Photo: Sergey Krivchikov The Sukhoi Su-30 is a twin-engine, two-seat supermanoeuverable fighter aircraft developed by Russia's Sukhoi Aviation Corporation. It is a multirole fighter for all-weather, air-to-air and air-to-surface deep interdiction missions. Its primary users are Russia, India, China, Venezuela, and Malaysia. More selected pictures Image 4 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 5 Curiosity (rover)Photograph: NASA A self-portrait by the Mars rover Curiosity on October 31, 2012. The mosaic is stitched from a set of 55 images taken by the Mars Hand Lens Imager at "Rocknest," the spot in Gale crater where the mission's first scoop sampling took place. Self-portraits such as this help NASA document the state of the rover and track changes, such as dust accumulation and wheel wear. More selected pictures Image 6 RiggerPhoto credit: Alfred T. Palmer "Big Pete" Ramagos, rigger at work on Douglas Dam, Tennessee, June 1942. A rigger is a person or company which specializes in the lifting and/or moving of extremely large and/or heavy objects. Riggers use equipment expressly designed for moving and lifting objects where ordinary material handling equipment cannot go. More selected pictures Image 7 TRS connectorImage credit: Søren Peo Pedersen Two TRS connectors (also known as jack plugs or phone plugs), a common audio connector. They are cylindrical in shape, with two or more contacts. Originally invented for use in telephone switchboards, jack plugs are still widely used, both in the original ¼-inch (6.3 mm) size and in miniaturized versions. The top plug in this image is for stereo connections, while the bottom is for mono. More selected pictures Image 8 Assut de l'Or BridgePhotograph: Diego Delso The Assut de l'Or Bridge is a white single-pylon cable-stayed bridge in the City of Arts and Sciences, Valencia, Spain. Completed in 2008, it was designed by Valencian architect and civil engineer Santiago Calatrava as a variant of his cantilever spar cable-stayed bridge in Seville. More selected pictures Image 9 William CrooksPhotograph: National Photo Company, Restoration: Adam Cuerden The William Crooks is a 4-4-0 steam locomotive that was the first locomotive to operate in the U.S. state of Minnesota, beginning in 1861. It was named after William Crooks, the chief mechanical engineer for the St. Paul and Pacific Railroad, who earlier served as a colonel in the 6th Minnesota Volunteer Infantry Regiment during the American Civil War. Crooks laid out the initial ten-mile track between Minneapolis and St. Paul on which the locomotive operated. It was retired from regular service in 1897, but operated special services for several further decades. It is now in the Lake Superior Railroad Museum in Duluth. More selected pictures Image 10 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 11 Commodore 64Photo: Evan Amos The Commodore 64 is an 8-bit home computer introduced in 1982 by Commodore International. Its low retail price and easy availability led to the system becoming the market leader for three years. It remains the best-selling single personal computer model of all time. More selected pictures Image 12 New York City SubwayMap: CountZ A transit map of the New York City Subway, one of the oldest and most extensive public transportation systems in the world. Operated by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority of the State of New York, it has 468 stations in operation on 209 mi (337 km) of routes, with 842 miles (1,355 km) of track. It is the busiest rapid transit rail system by annual ridership in the Western Hemisphere, and fifth busiest in the world. Its stations are located throughout the boroughs of Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx. Staten Island has its own rail line which is not part of the system, but is included in the map as well. More selected pictures Image 13 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 14 Mazda RX-8Photo credit: Fir0002 The Mazda RX-8 sports car is a front mid-engine, rear-wheel drive four-seat coupé manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation. It is the successor to the RX-7 and, like its predecessors in the RX range, it is powered by a rotary engine. The RX-8 began North American sales in the 2004 model year. More selected pictures Image 15 Australia Telescope Compact ArrayPhotograph credit: John Masterson, CSIRO; restored by Bammesk The Australia Telescope Compact Array is a radio telescope operated by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) at the Paul Wild Observatory, 25 km (16 mi) west of the town of Narrabri in New South Wales, Australia. The telescope is an array of six identical dishes each 22 metres (72 ft) in diameter, which commonly operate in aperture synthesis mode to produce images from radio waves. Five of the dishes can be moved along a 3-kilometre (2 mi) railway track; the sixth is situated three kilometres west of the end of the main track. Each dish weighs about 270 tonnes (270 long tons; 300 short tons). This photograph, showing five of the Australia Telescope Compact Array's dishes, was taken around 1984, in the late phase of the construction process. It is a long-exposure photograph taken in darkness in the late evening; during the exposure, the photographer, John Masterson, walked around the dishes firing off over 130 flashes using a hand-held flash gun. More selected pictures Image 16 Stockwell GaragePhotograph: David Iliff An interior view of Stockwell Garage, a large bus garage in Stockwell, London, designed by Adie, Button and Partners and opened in 1952. The 393-foot-long (120 m) roof structure, seen here, is supported by ten very shallow "two-hinged" arched ribs, between which are cantilevered barrel vaults topped by large skylights. The garage, which could originally hold 200 buses, has been a Grade II* Listed Building since 1988. More selected pictures Image 17 WindmillPhoto credit: Michael Reeve Pitstone Windmill, believed to be the oldest windmill in the British Isles A windmill is an engine powered by wind energy. In Europe, windmills have been used since the Middle Ages. They were developed from the 12th century, apparently from technology gained by crusaders who came into contact with windmills in the Middle East. Persian sources indicate windmill use as early as the 7th century BC. In the United States, the development of water-pumping windmills was a major factor in allowing the farming of vast areas of North America. More selected pictures Image 18 Movable typePhoto credit: Willi Heidelbach A composing stick and movable type, the system of printing and typography using pieces of metal type, made by casting from matrices struck by letterpunches. The text on the stick reads, "The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog and feels as if he were in the seventh heaven of typography together with Hermann Zapf, the most famous artist of the" [sic]. More selected pictures Image 19 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 20 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Wu Ziliang developed the technology to separate uranium-235 for China's first nuclear bomb? ... that Theresa M. Korn turned down a scholarship to the Carnegie Institute of Technology in order to become the institute's first female engineer? ... that Munster Technological University, scheduled to open in 2021, will be only the second university of its type in Ireland? ... that modified mRNA (mRNA translation depicted) is a key technology in the Moderna and BioNTech/Pfizer vaccines against COVID-19? ... that the Society for the History of Technology gave Canadian historian Joy Parr a medal for lifetime achievement in technology history and awarded her book Sensing Changes the Edelstein Prize? ... that in 1948 and 1952, nuclear physicist Leslie Shepherd published scientific papers on the use of nuclear technology for interplanetary and interstellar space travel? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. , Musk is the second richest person in the world with an estimated net worth of over US$300 billion. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 State Route 1002 (SR 1002), locally known as Tilghman Street and Union Boulevard, is a major 13.8 mi (22.2 km) long east–west road in the Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton metropolitan area of the U.S. state of Pennsylvania. The majority of the roadway is the former alignment of U.S. Route 22, maintained by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as a Quadrant Route, and is not signed except on small white segment markers. Tilghman Street begins at Pennsylvania Route 100 in Fogelsville, though SR 1002 continues west on Main Street (also old US 22) to the intersection of Church Street (SR 3014). It becomes Union Boulevard just east of the bridge over the Lehigh River in Allentown; SR 1002 ends at the interchange with Pennsylvania Route 378 in Bethlehem. Union Boulevard continues over Monocacy Creek, which forms the border between Lehigh and Northampton Counties, and ends in downtown Bethlehem. (Full article...) Image 2 Highway 142 (AR 142) is a north–south state highway in Chicot County, Arkansas. The route starts its southern terminus at Levee Road near Lakeport. The road then travels north, passing through the Lakeport Plantation. It ends at its northern terminus at U.S. Route 82 (US 82) and US 278 in Shives. AR 142 was designated in 1931, from US 61 to the Mississippi River, and part of the route was redesignated as part of US 82 in 1940. The route was paved in asphalt by 1962. The route is maintained by the Arkansas Department of Transportation (ArDOT). (Full article...) Image 3 New York State Route 48 (NY 48) is a 28.20-mile (45.38 km) north–south state highway in Central New York in the United States. The southern terminus of the route is located at Interstate 690 (I-690) exit 3 near the interchange between I-690 and the New York State Thruway (I-90) in Van Buren, northwest of Syracuse. The northern terminus is located at an intersection with NY 104 in Oswego. In between, NY 48 passes through the riverside communities of Baldwinsville and Fulton and runs alongside both the Seneca River and Oswego River. For most of its route, NY 48 serves as an alternate route of NY 481. The routes share similar alignments along the Oswego River from the Syracuse area to Oswego, with NY 481 following the eastern riverbank between the two locations. When the route was originally assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York, it extended southward into downtown Syracuse. NY 48 was truncated to Van Buren after I-690 was built over portions of the road in the late 1950s and early 1960s. The portion of former NY 48 that was not supplanted by I-690 was turned over to Onondaga County; however, the state reacquired the segment adjacent to the New York State Fairgrounds in 1980. Around 1931, a suffixed spur of NY 48, New York State Route 48A was designated as an alternate from Oswego to the town of Minetto. The route was deleted from the state highway system around 1940. (Full article...) Image 4 K-95 is an approximately 6.6-mile-long (10.6 km) state highway in the U.S. state of Kansas. K-95's southern terminus is at U.S. Route 83 (US-83) north of Scott City, and the northern terminus is at US-83 south of Elkader. The highway forms a section of the Western Vistas Historic Byway. K-95 travels through mostly rural land, and is a two-lane highway its entire length. Within Lake Scott State Park, just west of K-95, is the El Cuartelejo ruins. It is the remains of a structure thought to have been built by Taos Pueblo Indians who left New Mexico in 1664 to escape Spanish rule. The highway passes about 0.6 miles (970 m) east of the area of the Battle of Punished Woman's Fork, the last Indian battle in the state. The route that K-95 follows was planned to become a state highway in a resolution on July 27, 1966, to link US-83 to Lake Scott and Lake Scott State Park. This alignment was altered in a resolution on May 10, 1967, and was designated as K-95. K-95 first appeared on the 1969 State Highway Map, and its alignment has not changed since. (Full article...) Image 5 The Ebbw Valley Railway (Welsh: Rheilffordd Cwm Ebwy) is a branch line of the South Wales Main Line in South Wales. Transport for Wales Rail provides an hourly passenger service each way, between Ebbw Vale Town and Cardiff Central. Additional Services to Newport are due to commence daily from 12 December at a rate of one per hour in each direction. The line was opened by the Monmouthshire Railway and Canal Company and the Great Western Railway (GWR) operated a passenger service from the 1850s between Newport and Ebbw Vale. The line became part of British Railways Western Region in 1948, following the nationalisation of the railways. Passenger services were withdrawn in 1962. However, the route continued to be used to carry freight to and from the Corus steelworks in Ebbw Vale, until its closure in 2002. Proposals to re-open the existing freight railway line to passenger services were first mooted in 1998. The Welsh Assembly Government announced their commitment to the project in 2002, as part of a package of measures to help the former steel communities. (Full article...) Image 6 Interstate 78 (I-78) is a part of the Interstate Highway System that runs from Union Township, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania, to New York City. In the U.S. state of New York, I-78 extends 0.90 miles (1.45 km). The entirety of I-78 consists of the Holland Tunnel, which crosses under the Hudson River from New Jersey and ends at an exit rotary in Lower Manhattan. The tunnel and its approaches are maintained by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey (PANYNJ). I-78 was planned to take a longer route when the Interstate System within New York City was originally proposed in the late 1950s. The proposed route of I-78 was to head east via the Williamsburg Bridge to John F. Kennedy International Airport and then north over the Throgs Neck Bridge to I-95 in the Bronx. One unbuilt section of I-78, the Lower Manhattan Expressway, would have connected the Holland Tunnel to the Williamsburg and Manhattan Bridges. Another unbuilt section, the Cross-Brooklyn and Bushwick Expressways, would have extended southeast across Brooklyn, connecting to what is now the Nassau Expressway (New York State Route 878 or NY 878). A third section would have connected the Nassau Expressway, at the southern edge of Queens near JFK Airport, to the southern end of what is now I-295, in central Queens. Due to opposition from the communities along the expressways' routes, these sections of I-78 were never built, and I-78 does not connect to I-278 or to any of its other auxiliary routes. (Full article...) Image 7 Glen Parmelee Robinson, Jr. (September 10, 1923 – January 16, 2013), called the "father of high-tech industry in Georgia", was an American businessman and founder of Scientific Atlanta, now a subsidiary of Cisco Systems. Robinson was the first employee of Scientific Atlanta, where he remained CEO then Chairman of the company until he retired. Initially a ham radio enthusiast and subsequently a graduate of the Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech) with both bachelor's and master's degrees in physics, Robinson worked at the Georgia Tech Research Institute and the Oak Ridge National Laboratory before founding Scientific Atlanta. Later in life, he founded and invested in numerous Atlanta-based science-related companies. Robinson was named an IEEE Fellow and held at least 39 patents in fields including solar energy devices and antenna systems. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 Continuous castingPhoto: Alchemist-hp A disc of copper made by continuous casting, the process whereby molten metal is solidified into a "semifinished" state for subsequent rolling in the finishing mills. Continuous casting replaced the creation of ingots using stationary moulds. The process allows lower-cost production of metal sections with better quality, due to the inherently lower costs of continuous, standardised production of a product, as well as providing increased control over the process through automation. After casting, this disc was then etched to achieve its final state. More selected pictures Image 2 Bucket-wheel excavatorsPhotograph: Raimond Spekking Bucket-wheel excavators (BWEs) are heavy equipment used in surface mining. The primary function of a BWE is to act as a continuous digging machine in large-scale open pit mining operations. These BWEs were photographed at the Garzweiler surface mine in Germany. More selected pictures Image 3 Sukhoi Su-30Photo: Sergey Krivchikov The Sukhoi Su-30 is a twin-engine, two-seat supermanoeuverable fighter aircraft developed by Russia's Sukhoi Aviation Corporation. It is a multirole fighter for all-weather, air-to-air and air-to-surface deep interdiction missions. Its primary users are Russia, India, China, Venezuela, and Malaysia. More selected pictures Image 4 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 5 Curiosity (rover)Photograph: NASA A self-portrait by the Mars rover Curiosity on October 31, 2012. The mosaic is stitched from a set of 55 images taken by the Mars Hand Lens Imager at "Rocknest," the spot in Gale crater where the mission's first scoop sampling took place. Self-portraits such as this help NASA document the state of the rover and track changes, such as dust accumulation and wheel wear. More selected pictures Image 6 RiggerPhoto credit: Alfred T. Palmer "Big Pete" Ramagos, rigger at work on Douglas Dam, Tennessee, June 1942. A rigger is a person or company which specializes in the lifting and/or moving of extremely large and/or heavy objects. Riggers use equipment expressly designed for moving and lifting objects where ordinary material handling equipment cannot go. More selected pictures Image 7 TRS connectorImage credit: Søren Peo Pedersen Two TRS connectors (also known as jack plugs or phone plugs), a common audio connector. They are cylindrical in shape, with two or more contacts. Originally invented for use in telephone switchboards, jack plugs are still widely used, both in the original ¼-inch (6.3 mm) size and in miniaturized versions. The top plug in this image is for stereo connections, while the bottom is for mono. More selected pictures Image 8 Assut de l'Or BridgePhotograph: Diego Delso The Assut de l'Or Bridge is a white single-pylon cable-stayed bridge in the City of Arts and Sciences, Valencia, Spain. Completed in 2008, it was designed by Valencian architect and civil engineer Santiago Calatrava as a variant of his cantilever spar cable-stayed bridge in Seville. More selected pictures Image 9 William CrooksPhotograph: National Photo Company, Restoration: Adam Cuerden The William Crooks is a 4-4-0 steam locomotive that was the first locomotive to operate in the U.S. state of Minnesota, beginning in 1861. It was named after William Crooks, the chief mechanical engineer for the St. Paul and Pacific Railroad, who earlier served as a colonel in the 6th Minnesota Volunteer Infantry Regiment during the American Civil War. Crooks laid out the initial ten-mile track between Minneapolis and St. Paul on which the locomotive operated. It was retired from regular service in 1897, but operated special services for several further decades. It is now in the Lake Superior Railroad Museum in Duluth. More selected pictures Image 10 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 11 Commodore 64Photo: Evan Amos The Commodore 64 is an 8-bit home computer introduced in 1982 by Commodore International. Its low retail price and easy availability led to the system becoming the market leader for three years. It remains the best-selling single personal computer model of all time. More selected pictures Image 12 New York City SubwayMap: CountZ A transit map of the New York City Subway, one of the oldest and most extensive public transportation systems in the world. Operated by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority of the State of New York, it has 468 stations in operation on 209 mi (337 km) of routes, with 842 miles (1,355 km) of track. It is the busiest rapid transit rail system by annual ridership in the Western Hemisphere, and fifth busiest in the world. Its stations are located throughout the boroughs of Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx. Staten Island has its own rail line which is not part of the system, but is included in the map as well. More selected pictures Image 13 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 14 Mazda RX-8Photo credit: Fir0002 The Mazda RX-8 sports car is a front mid-engine, rear-wheel drive four-seat coupé manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation. It is the successor to the RX-7 and, like its predecessors in the RX range, it is powered by a rotary engine. The RX-8 began North American sales in the 2004 model year. More selected pictures Image 15 Australia Telescope Compact ArrayPhotograph credit: John Masterson, CSIRO; restored by Bammesk The Australia Telescope Compact Array is a radio telescope operated by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) at the Paul Wild Observatory, 25 km (16 mi) west of the town of Narrabri in New South Wales, Australia. The telescope is an array of six identical dishes each 22 metres (72 ft) in diameter, which commonly operate in aperture synthesis mode to produce images from radio waves. Five of the dishes can be moved along a 3-kilometre (2 mi) railway track; the sixth is situated three kilometres west of the end of the main track. Each dish weighs about 270 tonnes (270 long tons; 300 short tons). This photograph, showing five of the Australia Telescope Compact Array's dishes, was taken around 1984, in the late phase of the construction process. It is a long-exposure photograph taken in darkness in the late evening; during the exposure, the photographer, John Masterson, walked around the dishes firing off over 130 flashes using a hand-held flash gun. More selected pictures Image 16 Stockwell GaragePhotograph: David Iliff An interior view of Stockwell Garage, a large bus garage in Stockwell, London, designed by Adie, Button and Partners and opened in 1952. The 393-foot-long (120 m) roof structure, seen here, is supported by ten very shallow "two-hinged" arched ribs, between which are cantilevered barrel vaults topped by large skylights. The garage, which could originally hold 200 buses, has been a Grade II* Listed Building since 1988. More selected pictures Image 17 WindmillPhoto credit: Michael Reeve Pitstone Windmill, believed to be the oldest windmill in the British Isles A windmill is an engine powered by wind energy. In Europe, windmills have been used since the Middle Ages. They were developed from the 12th century, apparently from technology gained by crusaders who came into contact with windmills in the Middle East. Persian sources indicate windmill use as early as the 7th century BC. In the United States, the development of water-pumping windmills was a major factor in allowing the farming of vast areas of North America. More selected pictures Image 18 Movable typePhoto credit: Willi Heidelbach A composing stick and movable type, the system of printing and typography using pieces of metal type, made by casting from matrices struck by letterpunches. The text on the stick reads, "The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog and feels as if he were in the seventh heaven of typography together with Hermann Zapf, the most famous artist of the" [sic]. More selected pictures Image 19 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 20 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Wu Ziliang developed the technology to separate uranium-235 for China's first nuclear bomb? ... that Theresa M. Korn turned down a scholarship to the Carnegie Institute of Technology in order to become the institute's first female engineer? ... that Munster Technological University, scheduled to open in 2021, will be only the second university of its type in Ireland? ... that modified mRNA (mRNA translation depicted) is a key technology in the Moderna and BioNTech/Pfizer vaccines against COVID-19? ... that the Society for the History of Technology gave Canadian historian Joy Parr a medal for lifetime achievement in technology history and awarded her book Sensing Changes the Edelstein Prize? ... that in 1948 and 1952, nuclear physicist Leslie Shepherd published scientific papers on the use of nuclear technology for interplanetary and interstellar space travel? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. , Musk is the second richest person in the world with an estimated net worth of over US$300 billion. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 photo courtesy of Todd W. White John Kenneth Hilliard (October 1901 – March 21, 1989) was an American acoustical and electrical engineer who pioneered a number of important loudspeaker concepts and designs. He helped develop the practical use of recording sound for film, and won an Academy Award in 1935. He designed movie theater sound systems, and he worked on radar as well as submarine detection equipment during World War II. Hilliard collaborated with James B. "Jim" Lansing in creating the long-lived Altec Voice of the Theatre speaker system. Hilliard researched high-intensity acoustics, vibration, miniaturization and long-line communications for NASA and the Air Force. Near the end of his career, he standardized noise-control criteria for home construction in California, a pattern since applied to new homes throughout the U.S. (Full article...) Image 2 PowerBook 150 The PowerBook 100 is a portable subnotebook personal computer designed and manufactured by Sony for Apple Computer and introduced on October 21, 1991, at the COMDEX computer expo in Las Vegas, Nevada. Priced at US$2,500 with external floppy drive, the PowerBook 100 was the low-end model of the first three simultaneously released PowerBooks. Its CPU and overall speed closely resembled those of its predecessor, the Macintosh Portable. It had a Motorola 68000 processor at 16 MHz, 2-8 megabytes (MB) of RAM, a 9-inch (23 cm) monochrome backlit liquid crystal display (LCD) with 640 × 400 pixel resolution, and the System 7.0.1 operating system. It did not have a built-in floppy disk drive and was noted for its unique compact design that placed a trackball pointing device in front of the keyboard for ease of use. Apple's then-chief executive officer (CEO) John Sculley started the PowerBook project in 1990, allocating $1 million for marketing. Despite the small marketing budget, the new PowerBook line was a success, generating over $1 billion in revenue for Apple in its first year. Sony designed and manufactured the PowerBook 100 in collaboration with the Apple Industrial Design Group, Apple's internal design team. It was discontinued on September 3, 1992, and superseded by the PowerBook 145 and PowerBook Duo series. Since then, it has been praised several times for its design; PC World named the PowerBook 100 the tenth-greatest PC of all time in 2006, and US magazine Mobile PC chose the PowerBook 100 as the greatest gadget of all time in 2005. (Full article...) Image 3 State Route 527 (SR 527, also known as the Bothell–Everett Highway) is a state highway in Snohomish County, Washington. It travels 9 miles (14 km) from north to south, connecting the northern Seattle suburbs of Bothell, Mill Creek, and Everett. The highway intersects Interstate 405 (I-405) at its southern terminus, SR 96 in northern Mill Creek, and I-5 at an interchange with SR 99 and SR 526 in Everett. The Bothell–Everett Highway was built in the 1910s as part of the intercity Pacific Highway and briefly formed part of U.S. Route 99 (US 99) in 1926. The following year, US 99 was moved west to a new highway that would later become modern-day SR 99. The old route to the east was signed by the state as Secondary State Highway 2A (SSH 2A) from 1937 to 1943 and SSH 2J from 1957 to 1964, when it was renumbered as SR 527. (Full article...) Image 4 Dan Dugan (born March 20, 1943) is an American audio engineer, inventor, and nature sounds recordist. He was the first person in regional theatre to be called a sound designer, and he developed the first effective automatic microphone mixer: the automixer. Dugan's sound design work was acknowledged in 2003 with a Distinguished Career Award by the United States Institute for Theatre Technology, and in 2020 with an Emmy Award for technology relevant to remote working. In 2021 he was awarded Fellowship in the Audio Engineering Society. In his youth, Dugan was fascinated by the technical aspects of theatre. He worked as a lighting designer then transitioned to sound design in 1967. Dugan became interested in achieving the automatic adjustment of sound controls after a frustrating experience staging the musical Hair. His first automixer design was not fully practical but his second design was successful; it used a reference derived from a total of all of its microphone signals. Dugan devised a third improvement which helped prevent audio feedback in the presence of sound reinforcement loudspeakers. Dugan next produced an automixer design that could be inserted into an existing mixing console. This proved popular for broadcast and live sound applications. Each of Dugan's subsequent automixer models has been of the insertable type. (Full article...) Image 5 Interstate 405 (I-405), also known as the Stadium Freeway No. 61, is a short north–south Interstate Highway in Portland, Oregon. It forms a loop that travels around the west side of Downtown Portland, between two junctions with I-5 on the Willamette River near the Marquam Bridge to the south and Fremont Bridge to the north. The Stadium Freeway was envisioned in the 1940s and 1950s by the state government and was added to the Interstate Highway system in 1958. Construction began in 1963, utilizing a trench with extensive landscaping and frequent overpasses, and was the most expensive freeway project in state history at a cost of $121 million. Hundreds of buildings were demolished to make way for the freeway, which displaced approximately 1,100 households. (Full article...) Image 6 Exit 6 of Woodlands station Woodlands MRT station is a Singapore Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) interchange station on the North South (NSL) and Thomson–East Coast (TEL) lines. Located in Woodlands, the MRT station is the first to feature an underground bus interchange underneath the NSL station. The station is also integrated with surrounding developments, including Causeway Point and the Woodlands Civic Centre. The NSL station was first announced in November 1991 as part of the Woodlands MRT extension. Completed on 10 February 1996, the elevated station has a circular, barrel-like roof with beige and green tiles. Min Chan's Faces II sculpture is displayed near the station. (Full article...) Image 7 The Ferrari P4/5 (officially known as the Ferrari P4/5 by Pininfarina) is a one-off sports car made by Italian sports car manufacturer Ferrari but redesigned by Pininfarina for film director James Glickenhaus, son of stock exchange magnate Seth Glickenhaus. The car was initially an Enzo Ferrari but the owner James Glickenhaus preferred the styling of Ferrari's 1960s race cars, the P Series. The project cost Glickenhaus US$ 4 million and was officially presented to the public in August 2006 at the Pebble Beach Concours d'Elégance. Several websites were allowed to publish images of the clay model in July 2006. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 2 KeypunchPicture: Unknown; restoration: Mmxx A woman using a Hollerith pantograph, a machine developed by Herman Hollerith for the punching of cards, providing data which could then be processed. Such tools were used in the 1890 United States Census, the first time the country's census was tabulated by machine. More selected pictures Image 3 George Washington CarverPhoto: Arthur Rothstein; Restoration: Lise Broer A portrait of George Washington Carver, American scientist, botanist, educator and inventor, from 1942. Much of Carver's fame is based on his research into and promotion of alternative crops to cotton, such as peanuts and sweet potatoes. In addition to his work on agricultural extension education for purposes of advocacy of sustainable agriculture and appreciation of plants and nature, Carver's important accomplishments also included improvement of racial relations, mentoring children, poetry, painting, and religion. One of his most important roles was in undermining, through the fame of his achievements and many talents, the widespread stereotype of the time that the black race was intellectually inferior to the white race. More selected pictures Image 4 Trojan Room coffee potPicture: Quentin Stafford-Fraser The Trojan Room coffee pot was the inspiration for the world's first webcam. The coffee pot was located in the corridor just outside the so-called Trojan Room within the old Computer Laboratory of the University of Cambridge. The webcam was created in 1991 to help people working in other parts of the building avoid pointless trips to the coffee pot by providing, on the user's desktop computer, a live 128×128 pixel greyscale picture of the state of the coffee pot. The webcam was shut down on 22 August 2001, following the Computer Laboratory's move to the William Gates Building. More selected pictures Image 5 Commodore 64Photo: Evan Amos The Commodore 64 is an 8-bit home computer introduced in 1982 by Commodore International. Its low retail price and easy availability led to the system becoming the market leader for three years. It remains the best-selling single personal computer model of all time. More selected pictures Image 6 Flat-four enginePhotograph: ULPower Aero Engines The ULPower UL260i, a flat-four engine produced by ULPower Aero Engines of Belgium. Flat-four engines are flat engines with four cylinders arranged horizontally in two banks of two cylinders on each side of a central crankcase; they can be used in cars, motorcycles, or aircraft. This type of engine tends to be well-balanced and have efficient cooling, but is expensive to manufacture and considerably wider than other engines. More selected pictures Image 7 Wiesen ViaductPhotograph: David Gubler The Wiesen Viaduct is a single-track railway viaduct (concrete blocks with dimension stone coverage) which spans the Landwasser southwest of the hamlet of Wiesen, Switzerland. Designed by Henning Friedrich, then the chief engineer of the Rhaetian Railway, it was built between 1906 and 1909 by the contractor G. Marasi (Westermann & Cie, Zürich) under the supervision of P. Salaz and Hans Studer (RhB). The Rhaetian Railway still owns and uses the viaduct today for regular service with 29 passenger trains per day. An important element of the Davos–Filisur railway, the viaduct is 88.9 metres (292 ft) high, 210 metres (690 ft) long, and has a main span of 55 metres (180 ft). In 1926, the viaduct was the inspiration for Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's painting Brücke bei Wiesen. More selected pictures Image 8 Jet engineDiagram: Jeff Dahl A diagram of a typical turbojet engine. Air is compressed as it enters the engine, and is mixed with fuel that burns in the combustion section. Released through the exhaust, the resulting hot gases provide forward thrust and turn the turbines that drive the fan blades of the compressor. More selected pictures Image 9 Mazda RX-8Photo credit: Fir0002 The Mazda RX-8 sports car is a front mid-engine, rear-wheel drive four-seat coupé manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation. It is the successor to the RX-7 and, like its predecessors in the RX range, it is powered by a rotary engine. The RX-8 began North American sales in the 2004 model year. More selected pictures Image 10 Mark IV tankPhotograph: Peter Trimming The Mark IV tank was introduced by the British in May 1917 to fight in World War I. The "female" version, as pictured here, was armed with five machine guns. Production of the Mark IV ceased at the end of the War in 1918. A small number served briefly with other combatants afterwards. This Mark IV tank, on display in Ashford, Kent, was presented to the town after the end of World War I. The engine was removed to install an electricity substation inside it, though this substation was subsequently removed; the tank's interior is now empty. More selected pictures Image 11 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 12 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 13 Mechanical advantageImage credit: Prolineserver/Tomia This diagram of four pulley systems illustrates how increasing the number of pulleys increases the mechanical advantage, making the load easier to lift. MA is the factor by which a mechanism multiplies the force put into it. In this diagram, 100 newtons is required to lift the weight off the ground. Each additional pulley increases the MA such that the four-pulley system only needs 25 newtons to accomplish the same task, but the rope must be pulled four times as far. More selected pictures Image 14 Nuclear weaponImage credit: Fastfission Schematic representation of the two methods with which to assemble an atomic bomb. An A-bomb produces its explosive energy through nuclear fission reactions alone. A mass of fissile material (enriched uranium or plutonium) is assembled into a supercritical mass—the amount of material needed to start an exponentially growing nuclear chain reaction—either by shooting one piece of sub-critical material into another (the "gun" method, shown on top here), or by compressing a sub-critical sphere of material using chemical explosives to many times its original density (the "implosion" method, at bottom). More selected pictures Image 15 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 16 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 17 David FaimanPhotograph: David Shankbone David Faiman is an Israeli engineer and physicist recognized for his expertise on solar power. He is the director of the Ben-Gurion National Solar Energy Center and Chairman of the Department of Solar Energy & Environmental Physics at Ben-Gurion University's Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research in Sde Boker. More selected pictures Image 18 Four-stroke cyclePhoto credit: Eric Pierce The four-stroke cycle of an internal combustion engine is the cycle most commonly used for automotive and industrial purposes today, including cars, trucks, and generators. The cycle was invented by Nikolaus Otto in 1876, and is also called the Otto cycle. The cycle is characterized by four strokes, or straight movements in a single direction, of the piston. More selected pictures Image 19 Soyuz MSDiagram credit: AstroBidules The Soyuz MS is the latest revision of the Russian spacecraft series Soyuz. It is an evolution of the Soyuz TMA-M, with modernization mostly concentrated on its communications and navigation subsystems. The spacecraft is used by Roscosmos for human spaceflight. The Soyuz MS has minimal external changes with respect to the Soyuz TMA-M, mostly limited to antennas and sensors, as well as the thruster placement. The first launch, Soyuz MS-01, took place on 7 July 2016 aboard a Soyuz-FG launch vehicle towards the International Space Station. This exploded-view diagram illustrates and labels various components of the Soyuz MS spacecraft and the Soyuz-FG rocket. More selected pictures Image 20 Red telephone boxPhotograph: Christoph Braun A 'K6' model red telephone box outside of St Paul's Cathedral in London. These kiosks for a public telephone were designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott and painted "currant red" for easy visibility. Although such telephone boxes ceased production when the KX series was introduced in 1985, they remain a common sight in Britain and some of its colonies, and are considered a British cultural icon. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Romanian neuroscientist Viviana Gradinaru was part of the research team from Caltech that found that serotonin is necessary for sleep in zebrafish and mice? ... that racing driver James Sofronas worked as a salesman for a technology company to buy the Nissan NX 2000 required for his first competitive race? ... that Alejandro Finocchiaro, Argentina's current Minister of Education, Culture, Science and Technology, produced the 2008 documentary Mujeres de la Shoá ('Women of the Holocaust')? ... that while raising two young children, Li Minhua became the first woman to earn a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at MIT? ... that Karlin Lillington, long-time technology writer for Ireland's newspaper of record, The Irish Times, holds a PhD on the poetry of Seamus Heaney? ... that Andrew Niikondo, acting vice-chancellor of the Namibia University of Science and Technology, completed his secondary school education only at age 30? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. A centibillionaire, Musk is the richest person in the world as of November 2021. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 photo courtesy of Todd W. White John Kenneth Hilliard (October 1901 – March 21, 1989) was an American acoustical and electrical engineer who pioneered a number of important loudspeaker concepts and designs. He helped develop the practical use of recording sound for film, and won an Academy Award in 1935. He designed movie theater sound systems, and he worked on radar as well as submarine detection equipment during World War II. Hilliard collaborated with James B. "Jim" Lansing in creating the long-lived Altec Voice of the Theatre speaker system. Hilliard researched high-intensity acoustics, vibration, miniaturization and long-line communications for NASA and the Air Force. Near the end of his career, he standardized noise-control criteria for home construction in California, a pattern since applied to new homes throughout the U.S. (Full article...) Image 2 PowerBook 150 The PowerBook 100 is a portable subnotebook personal computer designed and manufactured by Sony for Apple Computer and introduced on October 21, 1991, at the COMDEX computer expo in Las Vegas, Nevada. Priced at US$2,500 with external floppy drive, the PowerBook 100 was the low-end model of the first three simultaneously released PowerBooks. Its CPU and overall speed closely resembled those of its predecessor, the Macintosh Portable. It had a Motorola 68000 processor at 16 MHz, 2-8 megabytes (MB) of RAM, a 9-inch (23 cm) monochrome backlit liquid crystal display (LCD) with 640 × 400 pixel resolution, and the System 7.0.1 operating system. It did not have a built-in floppy disk drive and was noted for its unique compact design that placed a trackball pointing device in front of the keyboard for ease of use. Apple's then-chief executive officer (CEO) John Sculley started the PowerBook project in 1990, allocating $1 million for marketing. Despite the small marketing budget, the new PowerBook line was a success, generating over $1 billion in revenue for Apple in its first year. Sony designed and manufactured the PowerBook 100 in collaboration with the Apple Industrial Design Group, Apple's internal design team. It was discontinued on September 3, 1992, and superseded by the PowerBook 145 and PowerBook Duo series. Since then, it has been praised several times for its design; PC World named the PowerBook 100 the tenth-greatest PC of all time in 2006, and US magazine Mobile PC chose the PowerBook 100 as the greatest gadget of all time in 2005. (Full article...) Image 3 State Route 527 (SR 527, also known as the Bothell–Everett Highway) is a state highway in Snohomish County, Washington. It travels 9 miles (14 km) from north to south, connecting the northern Seattle suburbs of Bothell, Mill Creek, and Everett. The highway intersects Interstate 405 (I-405) at its southern terminus, SR 96 in northern Mill Creek, and I-5 at an interchange with SR 99 and SR 526 in Everett. The Bothell–Everett Highway was built in the 1910s as part of the intercity Pacific Highway and briefly formed part of U.S. Route 99 (US 99) in 1926. The following year, US 99 was moved west to a new highway that would later become modern-day SR 99. The old route to the east was signed by the state as Secondary State Highway 2A (SSH 2A) from 1937 to 1943 and SSH 2J from 1957 to 1964, when it was renumbered as SR 527. (Full article...) Image 4 Dan Dugan (born March 20, 1943) is an American audio engineer, inventor, and nature sounds recordist. He was the first person in regional theatre to be called a sound designer, and he developed the first effective automatic microphone mixer: the automixer. Dugan's sound design work was acknowledged in 2003 with a Distinguished Career Award by the United States Institute for Theatre Technology, and in 2020 with an Emmy Award for technology relevant to remote working. In 2021 he was awarded Fellowship in the Audio Engineering Society. In his youth, Dugan was fascinated by the technical aspects of theatre. He worked as a lighting designer then transitioned to sound design in 1967. Dugan became interested in achieving the automatic adjustment of sound controls after a frustrating experience staging the musical Hair. His first automixer design was not fully practical but his second design was successful; it used a reference derived from a total of all of its microphone signals. Dugan devised a third improvement which helped prevent audio feedback in the presence of sound reinforcement loudspeakers. Dugan next produced an automixer design that could be inserted into an existing mixing console. This proved popular for broadcast and live sound applications. Each of Dugan's subsequent automixer models has been of the insertable type. (Full article...) Image 5 Interstate 405 (I-405), also known as the Stadium Freeway No. 61, is a short north–south Interstate Highway in Portland, Oregon. It forms a loop that travels around the west side of Downtown Portland, between two junctions with I-5 on the Willamette River near the Marquam Bridge to the south and Fremont Bridge to the north. The Stadium Freeway was envisioned in the 1940s and 1950s by the state government and was added to the Interstate Highway system in 1958. Construction began in 1963, utilizing a trench with extensive landscaping and frequent overpasses, and was the most expensive freeway project in state history at a cost of $121 million. Hundreds of buildings were demolished to make way for the freeway, which displaced approximately 1,100 households. (Full article...) Image 6 Exit 6 of Woodlands station Woodlands MRT station is a Singapore Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) interchange station on the North South (NSL) and Thomson–East Coast (TEL) lines. Located in Woodlands, the MRT station is the first to feature an underground bus interchange underneath the NSL station. The station is also integrated with surrounding developments, including Causeway Point and the Woodlands Civic Centre. The NSL station was first announced in November 1991 as part of the Woodlands MRT extension. Completed on 10 February 1996, the elevated station has a circular, barrel-like roof with beige and green tiles. Min Chan's Faces II sculpture is displayed near the station. (Full article...) Image 7 The Ferrari P4/5 (officially known as the Ferrari P4/5 by Pininfarina) is a one-off sports car made by Italian sports car manufacturer Ferrari but redesigned by Pininfarina for film director James Glickenhaus, son of stock exchange magnate Seth Glickenhaus. The car was initially an Enzo Ferrari but the owner James Glickenhaus preferred the styling of Ferrari's 1960s race cars, the P Series. The project cost Glickenhaus US$ 4 million and was officially presented to the public in August 2006 at the Pebble Beach Concours d'Elégance. Several websites were allowed to publish images of the clay model in July 2006. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 2 KeypunchPicture: Unknown; restoration: Mmxx A woman using a Hollerith pantograph, a machine developed by Herman Hollerith for the punching of cards, providing data which could then be processed. Such tools were used in the 1890 United States Census, the first time the country's census was tabulated by machine. More selected pictures Image 3 George Washington CarverPhoto: Arthur Rothstein; Restoration: Lise Broer A portrait of George Washington Carver, American scientist, botanist, educator and inventor, from 1942. Much of Carver's fame is based on his research into and promotion of alternative crops to cotton, such as peanuts and sweet potatoes. In addition to his work on agricultural extension education for purposes of advocacy of sustainable agriculture and appreciation of plants and nature, Carver's important accomplishments also included improvement of racial relations, mentoring children, poetry, painting, and religion. One of his most important roles was in undermining, through the fame of his achievements and many talents, the widespread stereotype of the time that the black race was intellectually inferior to the white race. More selected pictures Image 4 Trojan Room coffee potPicture: Quentin Stafford-Fraser The Trojan Room coffee pot was the inspiration for the world's first webcam. The coffee pot was located in the corridor just outside the so-called Trojan Room within the old Computer Laboratory of the University of Cambridge. The webcam was created in 1991 to help people working in other parts of the building avoid pointless trips to the coffee pot by providing, on the user's desktop computer, a live 128×128 pixel greyscale picture of the state of the coffee pot. The webcam was shut down on 22 August 2001, following the Computer Laboratory's move to the William Gates Building. More selected pictures Image 5 Commodore 64Photo: Evan Amos The Commodore 64 is an 8-bit home computer introduced in 1982 by Commodore International. Its low retail price and easy availability led to the system becoming the market leader for three years. It remains the best-selling single personal computer model of all time. More selected pictures Image 6 Flat-four enginePhotograph: ULPower Aero Engines The ULPower UL260i, a flat-four engine produced by ULPower Aero Engines of Belgium. Flat-four engines are flat engines with four cylinders arranged horizontally in two banks of two cylinders on each side of a central crankcase; they can be used in cars, motorcycles, or aircraft. This type of engine tends to be well-balanced and have efficient cooling, but is expensive to manufacture and considerably wider than other engines. More selected pictures Image 7 Wiesen ViaductPhotograph: David Gubler The Wiesen Viaduct is a single-track railway viaduct (concrete blocks with dimension stone coverage) which spans the Landwasser southwest of the hamlet of Wiesen, Switzerland. Designed by Henning Friedrich, then the chief engineer of the Rhaetian Railway, it was built between 1906 and 1909 by the contractor G. Marasi (Westermann & Cie, Zürich) under the supervision of P. Salaz and Hans Studer (RhB). The Rhaetian Railway still owns and uses the viaduct today for regular service with 29 passenger trains per day. An important element of the Davos–Filisur railway, the viaduct is 88.9 metres (292 ft) high, 210 metres (690 ft) long, and has a main span of 55 metres (180 ft). In 1926, the viaduct was the inspiration for Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's painting Brücke bei Wiesen. More selected pictures Image 8 Jet engineDiagram: Jeff Dahl A diagram of a typical turbojet engine. Air is compressed as it enters the engine, and is mixed with fuel that burns in the combustion section. Released through the exhaust, the resulting hot gases provide forward thrust and turn the turbines that drive the fan blades of the compressor. More selected pictures Image 9 Mazda RX-8Photo credit: Fir0002 The Mazda RX-8 sports car is a front mid-engine, rear-wheel drive four-seat coupé manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation. It is the successor to the RX-7 and, like its predecessors in the RX range, it is powered by a rotary engine. The RX-8 began North American sales in the 2004 model year. More selected pictures Image 10 Mark IV tankPhotograph: Peter Trimming The Mark IV tank was introduced by the British in May 1917 to fight in World War I. The "female" version, as pictured here, was armed with five machine guns. Production of the Mark IV ceased at the end of the War in 1918. A small number served briefly with other combatants afterwards. This Mark IV tank, on display in Ashford, Kent, was presented to the town after the end of World War I. The engine was removed to install an electricity substation inside it, though this substation was subsequently removed; the tank's interior is now empty. More selected pictures Image 11 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 12 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 13 Mechanical advantageImage credit: Prolineserver/Tomia This diagram of four pulley systems illustrates how increasing the number of pulleys increases the mechanical advantage, making the load easier to lift. MA is the factor by which a mechanism multiplies the force put into it. In this diagram, 100 newtons is required to lift the weight off the ground. Each additional pulley increases the MA such that the four-pulley system only needs 25 newtons to accomplish the same task, but the rope must be pulled four times as far. More selected pictures Image 14 Nuclear weaponImage credit: Fastfission Schematic representation of the two methods with which to assemble an atomic bomb. An A-bomb produces its explosive energy through nuclear fission reactions alone. A mass of fissile material (enriched uranium or plutonium) is assembled into a supercritical mass—the amount of material needed to start an exponentially growing nuclear chain reaction—either by shooting one piece of sub-critical material into another (the "gun" method, shown on top here), or by compressing a sub-critical sphere of material using chemical explosives to many times its original density (the "implosion" method, at bottom). More selected pictures Image 15 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 16 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 17 David FaimanPhotograph: David Shankbone David Faiman is an Israeli engineer and physicist recognized for his expertise on solar power. He is the director of the Ben-Gurion National Solar Energy Center and Chairman of the Department of Solar Energy & Environmental Physics at Ben-Gurion University's Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research in Sde Boker. More selected pictures Image 18 Four-stroke cyclePhoto credit: Eric Pierce The four-stroke cycle of an internal combustion engine is the cycle most commonly used for automotive and industrial purposes today, including cars, trucks, and generators. The cycle was invented by Nikolaus Otto in 1876, and is also called the Otto cycle. The cycle is characterized by four strokes, or straight movements in a single direction, of the piston. More selected pictures Image 19 Soyuz MSDiagram credit: AstroBidules The Soyuz MS is the latest revision of the Russian spacecraft series Soyuz. It is an evolution of the Soyuz TMA-M, with modernization mostly concentrated on its communications and navigation subsystems. The spacecraft is used by Roscosmos for human spaceflight. The Soyuz MS has minimal external changes with respect to the Soyuz TMA-M, mostly limited to antennas and sensors, as well as the thruster placement. The first launch, Soyuz MS-01, took place on 7 July 2016 aboard a Soyuz-FG launch vehicle towards the International Space Station. This exploded-view diagram illustrates and labels various components of the Soyuz MS spacecraft and the Soyuz-FG rocket. More selected pictures Image 20 Red telephone boxPhotograph: Christoph Braun A 'K6' model red telephone box outside of St Paul's Cathedral in London. These kiosks for a public telephone were designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott and painted "currant red" for easy visibility. Although such telephone boxes ceased production when the KX series was introduced in 1985, they remain a common sight in Britain and some of its colonies, and are considered a British cultural icon. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Romanian neuroscientist Viviana Gradinaru was part of the research team from Caltech that found that serotonin is necessary for sleep in zebrafish and mice? ... that racing driver James Sofronas worked as a salesman for a technology company to buy the Nissan NX 2000 required for his first competitive race? ... that Alejandro Finocchiaro, Argentina's current Minister of Education, Culture, Science and Technology, produced the 2008 documentary Mujeres de la Shoá ('Women of the Holocaust')? ... that while raising two young children, Li Minhua became the first woman to earn a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at MIT? ... that Karlin Lillington, long-time technology writer for Ireland's newspaper of record, The Irish Times, holds a PhD on the poetry of Seamus Heaney? ... that Andrew Niikondo, acting vice-chancellor of the Namibia University of Science and Technology, completed his secondary school education only at age 30? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. A centibillionaire, Musk is the richest person in the world as of November 2021. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 photo courtesy of Todd W. White John Kenneth Hilliard (October 1901 – March 21, 1989) was an American acoustical and electrical engineer who pioneered a number of important loudspeaker concepts and designs. He helped develop the practical use of recording sound for film, and won an Academy Award in 1935. He designed movie theater sound systems, and he worked on radar as well as submarine detection equipment during World War II. Hilliard collaborated with James B. "Jim" Lansing in creating the long-lived Altec Voice of the Theatre speaker system. Hilliard researched high-intensity acoustics, vibration, miniaturization and long-line communications for NASA and the Air Force. Near the end of his career, he standardized noise-control criteria for home construction in California, a pattern since applied to new homes throughout the U.S. (Full article...) Image 2 PowerBook 150 The PowerBook 100 is a portable subnotebook personal computer designed and manufactured by Sony for Apple Computer and introduced on October 21, 1991, at the COMDEX computer expo in Las Vegas, Nevada. Priced at US$2,500 with external floppy drive, the PowerBook 100 was the low-end model of the first three simultaneously released PowerBooks. Its CPU and overall speed closely resembled those of its predecessor, the Macintosh Portable. It had a Motorola 68000 processor at 16 MHz, 2-8 megabytes (MB) of RAM, a 9-inch (23 cm) monochrome backlit liquid crystal display (LCD) with 640 × 400 pixel resolution, and the System 7.0.1 operating system. It did not have a built-in floppy disk drive and was noted for its unique compact design that placed a trackball pointing device in front of the keyboard for ease of use. Apple's then-chief executive officer (CEO) John Sculley started the PowerBook project in 1990, allocating $1 million for marketing. Despite the small marketing budget, the new PowerBook line was a success, generating over $1 billion in revenue for Apple in its first year. Sony designed and manufactured the PowerBook 100 in collaboration with the Apple Industrial Design Group, Apple's internal design team. It was discontinued on September 3, 1992, and superseded by the PowerBook 145 and PowerBook Duo series. Since then, it has been praised several times for its design; PC World named the PowerBook 100 the tenth-greatest PC of all time in 2006, and US magazine Mobile PC chose the PowerBook 100 as the greatest gadget of all time in 2005. (Full article...) Image 3 State Route 527 (SR 527, also known as the Bothell–Everett Highway) is a state highway in Snohomish County, Washington. It travels 9 miles (14 km) from north to south, connecting the northern Seattle suburbs of Bothell, Mill Creek, and Everett. The highway intersects Interstate 405 (I-405) at its southern terminus, SR 96 in northern Mill Creek, and I-5 at an interchange with SR 99 and SR 526 in Everett. The Bothell–Everett Highway was built in the 1910s as part of the intercity Pacific Highway and briefly formed part of U.S. Route 99 (US 99) in 1926. The following year, US 99 was moved west to a new highway that would later become modern-day SR 99. The old route to the east was signed by the state as Secondary State Highway 2A (SSH 2A) from 1937 to 1943 and SSH 2J from 1957 to 1964, when it was renumbered as SR 527. (Full article...) Image 4 Dan Dugan (born March 20, 1943) is an American audio engineer, inventor, and nature sounds recordist. He was the first person in regional theatre to be called a sound designer, and he developed the first effective automatic microphone mixer: the automixer. Dugan's sound design work was acknowledged in 2003 with a Distinguished Career Award by the United States Institute for Theatre Technology, and in 2020 with an Emmy Award for technology relevant to remote working. In 2021 he was awarded Fellowship in the Audio Engineering Society. In his youth, Dugan was fascinated by the technical aspects of theatre. He worked as a lighting designer then transitioned to sound design in 1967. Dugan became interested in achieving the automatic adjustment of sound controls after a frustrating experience staging the musical Hair. His first automixer design was not fully practical but his second design was successful; it used a reference derived from a total of all of its microphone signals. Dugan devised a third improvement which helped prevent audio feedback in the presence of sound reinforcement loudspeakers. Dugan next produced an automixer design that could be inserted into an existing mixing console. This proved popular for broadcast and live sound applications. Each of Dugan's subsequent automixer models has been of the insertable type. (Full article...) Image 5 Interstate 405 (I-405), also known as the Stadium Freeway No. 61, is a short north–south Interstate Highway in Portland, Oregon. It forms a loop that travels around the west side of Downtown Portland, between two junctions with I-5 on the Willamette River near the Marquam Bridge to the south and Fremont Bridge to the north. The Stadium Freeway was envisioned in the 1940s and 1950s by the state government and was added to the Interstate Highway system in 1958. Construction began in 1963, utilizing a trench with extensive landscaping and frequent overpasses, and was the most expensive freeway project in state history at a cost of $121 million. Hundreds of buildings were demolished to make way for the freeway, which displaced approximately 1,100 households. (Full article...) Image 6 Exit 6 of Woodlands station Woodlands MRT station is a Singapore Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) interchange station on the North South (NSL) and Thomson–East Coast (TEL) lines. Located in Woodlands, the MRT station is the first to feature an underground bus interchange underneath the NSL station. The station is also integrated with surrounding developments, including Causeway Point and the Woodlands Civic Centre. The NSL station was first announced in November 1991 as part of the Woodlands MRT extension. Completed on 10 February 1996, the elevated station has a circular, barrel-like roof with beige and green tiles. Min Chan's Faces II sculpture is displayed near the station. (Full article...) Image 7 The Ferrari P4/5 (officially known as the Ferrari P4/5 by Pininfarina) is a one-off sports car made by Italian sports car manufacturer Ferrari but redesigned by Pininfarina for film director James Glickenhaus, son of stock exchange magnate Seth Glickenhaus. The car was initially an Enzo Ferrari but the owner James Glickenhaus preferred the styling of Ferrari's 1960s race cars, the P Series. The project cost Glickenhaus US$ 4 million and was officially presented to the public in August 2006 at the Pebble Beach Concours d'Elégance. Several websites were allowed to publish images of the clay model in July 2006. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 2 KeypunchPicture: Unknown; restoration: Mmxx A woman using a Hollerith pantograph, a machine developed by Herman Hollerith for the punching of cards, providing data which could then be processed. Such tools were used in the 1890 United States Census, the first time the country's census was tabulated by machine. More selected pictures Image 3 George Washington CarverPhoto: Arthur Rothstein; Restoration: Lise Broer A portrait of George Washington Carver, American scientist, botanist, educator and inventor, from 1942. Much of Carver's fame is based on his research into and promotion of alternative crops to cotton, such as peanuts and sweet potatoes. In addition to his work on agricultural extension education for purposes of advocacy of sustainable agriculture and appreciation of plants and nature, Carver's important accomplishments also included improvement of racial relations, mentoring children, poetry, painting, and religion. One of his most important roles was in undermining, through the fame of his achievements and many talents, the widespread stereotype of the time that the black race was intellectually inferior to the white race. More selected pictures Image 4 Trojan Room coffee potPicture: Quentin Stafford-Fraser The Trojan Room coffee pot was the inspiration for the world's first webcam. The coffee pot was located in the corridor just outside the so-called Trojan Room within the old Computer Laboratory of the University of Cambridge. The webcam was created in 1991 to help people working in other parts of the building avoid pointless trips to the coffee pot by providing, on the user's desktop computer, a live 128×128 pixel greyscale picture of the state of the coffee pot. The webcam was shut down on 22 August 2001, following the Computer Laboratory's move to the William Gates Building. More selected pictures Image 5 Commodore 64Photo: Evan Amos The Commodore 64 is an 8-bit home computer introduced in 1982 by Commodore International. Its low retail price and easy availability led to the system becoming the market leader for three years. It remains the best-selling single personal computer model of all time. More selected pictures Image 6 Flat-four enginePhotograph: ULPower Aero Engines The ULPower UL260i, a flat-four engine produced by ULPower Aero Engines of Belgium. Flat-four engines are flat engines with four cylinders arranged horizontally in two banks of two cylinders on each side of a central crankcase; they can be used in cars, motorcycles, or aircraft. This type of engine tends to be well-balanced and have efficient cooling, but is expensive to manufacture and considerably wider than other engines. More selected pictures Image 7 Wiesen ViaductPhotograph: David Gubler The Wiesen Viaduct is a single-track railway viaduct (concrete blocks with dimension stone coverage) which spans the Landwasser southwest of the hamlet of Wiesen, Switzerland. Designed by Henning Friedrich, then the chief engineer of the Rhaetian Railway, it was built between 1906 and 1909 by the contractor G. Marasi (Westermann & Cie, Zürich) under the supervision of P. Salaz and Hans Studer (RhB). The Rhaetian Railway still owns and uses the viaduct today for regular service with 29 passenger trains per day. An important element of the Davos–Filisur railway, the viaduct is 88.9 metres (292 ft) high, 210 metres (690 ft) long, and has a main span of 55 metres (180 ft). In 1926, the viaduct was the inspiration for Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's painting Brücke bei Wiesen. More selected pictures Image 8 Jet engineDiagram: Jeff Dahl A diagram of a typical turbojet engine. Air is compressed as it enters the engine, and is mixed with fuel that burns in the combustion section. Released through the exhaust, the resulting hot gases provide forward thrust and turn the turbines that drive the fan blades of the compressor. More selected pictures Image 9 Mazda RX-8Photo credit: Fir0002 The Mazda RX-8 sports car is a front mid-engine, rear-wheel drive four-seat coupé manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation. It is the successor to the RX-7 and, like its predecessors in the RX range, it is powered by a rotary engine. The RX-8 began North American sales in the 2004 model year. More selected pictures Image 10 Mark IV tankPhotograph: Peter Trimming The Mark IV tank was introduced by the British in May 1917 to fight in World War I. The "female" version, as pictured here, was armed with five machine guns. Production of the Mark IV ceased at the end of the War in 1918. A small number served briefly with other combatants afterwards. This Mark IV tank, on display in Ashford, Kent, was presented to the town after the end of World War I. The engine was removed to install an electricity substation inside it, though this substation was subsequently removed; the tank's interior is now empty. More selected pictures Image 11 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 12 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 13 Mechanical advantageImage credit: Prolineserver/Tomia This diagram of four pulley systems illustrates how increasing the number of pulleys increases the mechanical advantage, making the load easier to lift. MA is the factor by which a mechanism multiplies the force put into it. In this diagram, 100 newtons is required to lift the weight off the ground. Each additional pulley increases the MA such that the four-pulley system only needs 25 newtons to accomplish the same task, but the rope must be pulled four times as far. More selected pictures Image 14 Nuclear weaponImage credit: Fastfission Schematic representation of the two methods with which to assemble an atomic bomb. An A-bomb produces its explosive energy through nuclear fission reactions alone. A mass of fissile material (enriched uranium or plutonium) is assembled into a supercritical mass—the amount of material needed to start an exponentially growing nuclear chain reaction—either by shooting one piece of sub-critical material into another (the "gun" method, shown on top here), or by compressing a sub-critical sphere of material using chemical explosives to many times its original density (the "implosion" method, at bottom). More selected pictures Image 15 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 16 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 17 David FaimanPhotograph: David Shankbone David Faiman is an Israeli engineer and physicist recognized for his expertise on solar power. He is the director of the Ben-Gurion National Solar Energy Center and Chairman of the Department of Solar Energy & Environmental Physics at Ben-Gurion University's Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research in Sde Boker. More selected pictures Image 18 Four-stroke cyclePhoto credit: Eric Pierce The four-stroke cycle of an internal combustion engine is the cycle most commonly used for automotive and industrial purposes today, including cars, trucks, and generators. The cycle was invented by Nikolaus Otto in 1876, and is also called the Otto cycle. The cycle is characterized by four strokes, or straight movements in a single direction, of the piston. More selected pictures Image 19 Soyuz MSDiagram credit: AstroBidules The Soyuz MS is the latest revision of the Russian spacecraft series Soyuz. It is an evolution of the Soyuz TMA-M, with modernization mostly concentrated on its communications and navigation subsystems. The spacecraft is used by Roscosmos for human spaceflight. The Soyuz MS has minimal external changes with respect to the Soyuz TMA-M, mostly limited to antennas and sensors, as well as the thruster placement. The first launch, Soyuz MS-01, took place on 7 July 2016 aboard a Soyuz-FG launch vehicle towards the International Space Station. This exploded-view diagram illustrates and labels various components of the Soyuz MS spacecraft and the Soyuz-FG rocket. More selected pictures Image 20 Red telephone boxPhotograph: Christoph Braun A 'K6' model red telephone box outside of St Paul's Cathedral in London. These kiosks for a public telephone were designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott and painted "currant red" for easy visibility. Although such telephone boxes ceased production when the KX series was introduced in 1985, they remain a common sight in Britain and some of its colonies, and are considered a British cultural icon. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Romanian neuroscientist Viviana Gradinaru was part of the research team from Caltech that found that serotonin is necessary for sleep in zebrafish and mice? ... that racing driver James Sofronas worked as a salesman for a technology company to buy the Nissan NX 2000 required for his first competitive race? ... that Alejandro Finocchiaro, Argentina's current Minister of Education, Culture, Science and Technology, produced the 2008 documentary Mujeres de la Shoá ('Women of the Holocaust')? ... that while raising two young children, Li Minhua became the first woman to earn a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at MIT? ... that Karlin Lillington, long-time technology writer for Ireland's newspaper of record, The Irish Times, holds a PhD on the poetry of Seamus Heaney? ... that Andrew Niikondo, acting vice-chancellor of the Namibia University of Science and Technology, completed his secondary school education only at age 30? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. A centibillionaire, Musk is the richest person in the world as of November 2021. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 photo courtesy of Todd W. White John Kenneth Hilliard (October 1901 – March 21, 1989) was an American acoustical and electrical engineer who pioneered a number of important loudspeaker concepts and designs. He helped develop the practical use of recording sound for film, and won an Academy Award in 1935. He designed movie theater sound systems, and he worked on radar as well as submarine detection equipment during World War II. Hilliard collaborated with James B. "Jim" Lansing in creating the long-lived Altec Voice of the Theatre speaker system. Hilliard researched high-intensity acoustics, vibration, miniaturization and long-line communications for NASA and the Air Force. Near the end of his career, he standardized noise-control criteria for home construction in California, a pattern since applied to new homes throughout the U.S. (Full article...) Image 2 PowerBook 150 The PowerBook 100 is a portable subnotebook personal computer designed and manufactured by Sony for Apple Computer and introduced on October 21, 1991, at the COMDEX computer expo in Las Vegas, Nevada. Priced at US$2,500 with external floppy drive, the PowerBook 100 was the low-end model of the first three simultaneously released PowerBooks. Its CPU and overall speed closely resembled those of its predecessor, the Macintosh Portable. It had a Motorola 68000 processor at 16 MHz, 2-8 megabytes (MB) of RAM, a 9-inch (23 cm) monochrome backlit liquid crystal display (LCD) with 640 × 400 pixel resolution, and the System 7.0.1 operating system. It did not have a built-in floppy disk drive and was noted for its unique compact design that placed a trackball pointing device in front of the keyboard for ease of use. Apple's then-chief executive officer (CEO) John Sculley started the PowerBook project in 1990, allocating $1 million for marketing. Despite the small marketing budget, the new PowerBook line was a success, generating over $1 billion in revenue for Apple in its first year. Sony designed and manufactured the PowerBook 100 in collaboration with the Apple Industrial Design Group, Apple's internal design team. It was discontinued on September 3, 1992, and superseded by the PowerBook 145 and PowerBook Duo series. Since then, it has been praised several times for its design; PC World named the PowerBook 100 the tenth-greatest PC of all time in 2006, and US magazine Mobile PC chose the PowerBook 100 as the greatest gadget of all time in 2005. (Full article...) Image 3 State Route 527 (SR 527, also known as the Bothell–Everett Highway) is a state highway in Snohomish County, Washington. It travels 9 miles (14 km) from north to south, connecting the northern Seattle suburbs of Bothell, Mill Creek, and Everett. The highway intersects Interstate 405 (I-405) at its southern terminus, SR 96 in northern Mill Creek, and I-5 at an interchange with SR 99 and SR 526 in Everett. The Bothell–Everett Highway was built in the 1910s as part of the intercity Pacific Highway and briefly formed part of U.S. Route 99 (US 99) in 1926. The following year, US 99 was moved west to a new highway that would later become modern-day SR 99. The old route to the east was signed by the state as Secondary State Highway 2A (SSH 2A) from 1937 to 1943 and SSH 2J from 1957 to 1964, when it was renumbered as SR 527. (Full article...) Image 4 Dan Dugan (born March 20, 1943) is an American audio engineer, inventor, and nature sounds recordist. He was the first person in regional theatre to be called a sound designer, and he developed the first effective automatic microphone mixer: the automixer. Dugan's sound design work was acknowledged in 2003 with a Distinguished Career Award by the United States Institute for Theatre Technology, and in 2020 with an Emmy Award for technology relevant to remote working. In 2021 he was awarded Fellowship in the Audio Engineering Society. In his youth, Dugan was fascinated by the technical aspects of theatre. He worked as a lighting designer then transitioned to sound design in 1967. Dugan became interested in achieving the automatic adjustment of sound controls after a frustrating experience staging the musical Hair. His first automixer design was not fully practical but his second design was successful; it used a reference derived from a total of all of its microphone signals. Dugan devised a third improvement which helped prevent audio feedback in the presence of sound reinforcement loudspeakers. Dugan next produced an automixer design that could be inserted into an existing mixing console. This proved popular for broadcast and live sound applications. Each of Dugan's subsequent automixer models has been of the insertable type. (Full article...) Image 5 Interstate 405 (I-405), also known as the Stadium Freeway No. 61, is a short north–south Interstate Highway in Portland, Oregon. It forms a loop that travels around the west side of Downtown Portland, between two junctions with I-5 on the Willamette River near the Marquam Bridge to the south and Fremont Bridge to the north. The Stadium Freeway was envisioned in the 1940s and 1950s by the state government and was added to the Interstate Highway system in 1958. Construction began in 1963, utilizing a trench with extensive landscaping and frequent overpasses, and was the most expensive freeway project in state history at a cost of $121 million. Hundreds of buildings were demolished to make way for the freeway, which displaced approximately 1,100 households. (Full article...) Image 6 Exit 6 of Woodlands station Woodlands MRT station is a Singapore Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) interchange station on the North South (NSL) and Thomson–East Coast (TEL) lines. Located in Woodlands, the MRT station is the first to feature an underground bus interchange underneath the NSL station. The station is also integrated with surrounding developments, including Causeway Point and the Woodlands Civic Centre. The NSL station was first announced in November 1991 as part of the Woodlands MRT extension. Completed on 10 February 1996, the elevated station has a circular, barrel-like roof with beige and green tiles. Min Chan's Faces II sculpture is displayed near the station. (Full article...) Image 7 The Ferrari P4/5 (officially known as the Ferrari P4/5 by Pininfarina) is a one-off sports car made by Italian sports car manufacturer Ferrari but redesigned by Pininfarina for film director James Glickenhaus, son of stock exchange magnate Seth Glickenhaus. The car was initially an Enzo Ferrari but the owner James Glickenhaus preferred the styling of Ferrari's 1960s race cars, the P Series. The project cost Glickenhaus US$ 4 million and was officially presented to the public in August 2006 at the Pebble Beach Concours d'Elégance. Several websites were allowed to publish images of the clay model in July 2006. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 2 KeypunchPicture: Unknown; restoration: Mmxx A woman using a Hollerith pantograph, a machine developed by Herman Hollerith for the punching of cards, providing data which could then be processed. Such tools were used in the 1890 United States Census, the first time the country's census was tabulated by machine. More selected pictures Image 3 George Washington CarverPhoto: Arthur Rothstein; Restoration: Lise Broer A portrait of George Washington Carver, American scientist, botanist, educator and inventor, from 1942. Much of Carver's fame is based on his research into and promotion of alternative crops to cotton, such as peanuts and sweet potatoes. In addition to his work on agricultural extension education for purposes of advocacy of sustainable agriculture and appreciation of plants and nature, Carver's important accomplishments also included improvement of racial relations, mentoring children, poetry, painting, and religion. One of his most important roles was in undermining, through the fame of his achievements and many talents, the widespread stereotype of the time that the black race was intellectually inferior to the white race. More selected pictures Image 4 Trojan Room coffee potPicture: Quentin Stafford-Fraser The Trojan Room coffee pot was the inspiration for the world's first webcam. The coffee pot was located in the corridor just outside the so-called Trojan Room within the old Computer Laboratory of the University of Cambridge. The webcam was created in 1991 to help people working in other parts of the building avoid pointless trips to the coffee pot by providing, on the user's desktop computer, a live 128×128 pixel greyscale picture of the state of the coffee pot. The webcam was shut down on 22 August 2001, following the Computer Laboratory's move to the William Gates Building. More selected pictures Image 5 Commodore 64Photo: Evan Amos The Commodore 64 is an 8-bit home computer introduced in 1982 by Commodore International. Its low retail price and easy availability led to the system becoming the market leader for three years. It remains the best-selling single personal computer model of all time. More selected pictures Image 6 Flat-four enginePhotograph: ULPower Aero Engines The ULPower UL260i, a flat-four engine produced by ULPower Aero Engines of Belgium. Flat-four engines are flat engines with four cylinders arranged horizontally in two banks of two cylinders on each side of a central crankcase; they can be used in cars, motorcycles, or aircraft. This type of engine tends to be well-balanced and have efficient cooling, but is expensive to manufacture and considerably wider than other engines. More selected pictures Image 7 Wiesen ViaductPhotograph: David Gubler The Wiesen Viaduct is a single-track railway viaduct (concrete blocks with dimension stone coverage) which spans the Landwasser southwest of the hamlet of Wiesen, Switzerland. Designed by Henning Friedrich, then the chief engineer of the Rhaetian Railway, it was built between 1906 and 1909 by the contractor G. Marasi (Westermann & Cie, Zürich) under the supervision of P. Salaz and Hans Studer (RhB). The Rhaetian Railway still owns and uses the viaduct today for regular service with 29 passenger trains per day. An important element of the Davos–Filisur railway, the viaduct is 88.9 metres (292 ft) high, 210 metres (690 ft) long, and has a main span of 55 metres (180 ft). In 1926, the viaduct was the inspiration for Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's painting Brücke bei Wiesen. More selected pictures Image 8 Jet engineDiagram: Jeff Dahl A diagram of a typical turbojet engine. Air is compressed as it enters the engine, and is mixed with fuel that burns in the combustion section. Released through the exhaust, the resulting hot gases provide forward thrust and turn the turbines that drive the fan blades of the compressor. More selected pictures Image 9 Mazda RX-8Photo credit: Fir0002 The Mazda RX-8 sports car is a front mid-engine, rear-wheel drive four-seat coupé manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation. It is the successor to the RX-7 and, like its predecessors in the RX range, it is powered by a rotary engine. The RX-8 began North American sales in the 2004 model year. More selected pictures Image 10 Mark IV tankPhotograph: Peter Trimming The Mark IV tank was introduced by the British in May 1917 to fight in World War I. The "female" version, as pictured here, was armed with five machine guns. Production of the Mark IV ceased at the end of the War in 1918. A small number served briefly with other combatants afterwards. This Mark IV tank, on display in Ashford, Kent, was presented to the town after the end of World War I. The engine was removed to install an electricity substation inside it, though this substation was subsequently removed; the tank's interior is now empty. More selected pictures Image 11 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 12 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 13 Mechanical advantageImage credit: Prolineserver/Tomia This diagram of four pulley systems illustrates how increasing the number of pulleys increases the mechanical advantage, making the load easier to lift. MA is the factor by which a mechanism multiplies the force put into it. In this diagram, 100 newtons is required to lift the weight off the ground. Each additional pulley increases the MA such that the four-pulley system only needs 25 newtons to accomplish the same task, but the rope must be pulled four times as far. More selected pictures Image 14 Nuclear weaponImage credit: Fastfission Schematic representation of the two methods with which to assemble an atomic bomb. An A-bomb produces its explosive energy through nuclear fission reactions alone. A mass of fissile material (enriched uranium or plutonium) is assembled into a supercritical mass—the amount of material needed to start an exponentially growing nuclear chain reaction—either by shooting one piece of sub-critical material into another (the "gun" method, shown on top here), or by compressing a sub-critical sphere of material using chemical explosives to many times its original density (the "implosion" method, at bottom). More selected pictures Image 15 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 16 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 17 David FaimanPhotograph: David Shankbone David Faiman is an Israeli engineer and physicist recognized for his expertise on solar power. He is the director of the Ben-Gurion National Solar Energy Center and Chairman of the Department of Solar Energy & Environmental Physics at Ben-Gurion University's Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research in Sde Boker. More selected pictures Image 18 Four-stroke cyclePhoto credit: Eric Pierce The four-stroke cycle of an internal combustion engine is the cycle most commonly used for automotive and industrial purposes today, including cars, trucks, and generators. The cycle was invented by Nikolaus Otto in 1876, and is also called the Otto cycle. The cycle is characterized by four strokes, or straight movements in a single direction, of the piston. More selected pictures Image 19 Soyuz MSDiagram credit: AstroBidules The Soyuz MS is the latest revision of the Russian spacecraft series Soyuz. It is an evolution of the Soyuz TMA-M, with modernization mostly concentrated on its communications and navigation subsystems. The spacecraft is used by Roscosmos for human spaceflight. The Soyuz MS has minimal external changes with respect to the Soyuz TMA-M, mostly limited to antennas and sensors, as well as the thruster placement. The first launch, Soyuz MS-01, took place on 7 July 2016 aboard a Soyuz-FG launch vehicle towards the International Space Station. This exploded-view diagram illustrates and labels various components of the Soyuz MS spacecraft and the Soyuz-FG rocket. More selected pictures Image 20 Red telephone boxPhotograph: Christoph Braun A 'K6' model red telephone box outside of St Paul's Cathedral in London. These kiosks for a public telephone were designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott and painted "currant red" for easy visibility. Although such telephone boxes ceased production when the KX series was introduced in 1985, they remain a common sight in Britain and some of its colonies, and are considered a British cultural icon. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Romanian neuroscientist Viviana Gradinaru was part of the research team from Caltech that found that serotonin is necessary for sleep in zebrafish and mice? ... that racing driver James Sofronas worked as a salesman for a technology company to buy the Nissan NX 2000 required for his first competitive race? ... that Alejandro Finocchiaro, Argentina's current Minister of Education, Culture, Science and Technology, produced the 2008 documentary Mujeres de la Shoá ('Women of the Holocaust')? ... that while raising two young children, Li Minhua became the first woman to earn a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at MIT? ... that Karlin Lillington, long-time technology writer for Ireland's newspaper of record, The Irish Times, holds a PhD on the poetry of Seamus Heaney? ... that Andrew Niikondo, acting vice-chancellor of the Namibia University of Science and Technology, completed his secondary school education only at age 30? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. A centibillionaire, Musk is the richest person in the world as of November 2021. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 photo courtesy of Todd W. White John Kenneth Hilliard (October 1901 – March 21, 1989) was an American acoustical and electrical engineer who pioneered a number of important loudspeaker concepts and designs. He helped develop the practical use of recording sound for film, and won an Academy Award in 1935. He designed movie theater sound systems, and he worked on radar as well as submarine detection equipment during World War II. Hilliard collaborated with James B. "Jim" Lansing in creating the long-lived Altec Voice of the Theatre speaker system. Hilliard researched high-intensity acoustics, vibration, miniaturization and long-line communications for NASA and the Air Force. Near the end of his career, he standardized noise-control criteria for home construction in California, a pattern since applied to new homes throughout the U.S. (Full article...) Image 2 PowerBook 150 The PowerBook 100 is a portable subnotebook personal computer designed and manufactured by Sony for Apple Computer and introduced on October 21, 1991, at the COMDEX computer expo in Las Vegas, Nevada. Priced at US$2,500 with external floppy drive, the PowerBook 100 was the low-end model of the first three simultaneously released PowerBooks. Its CPU and overall speed closely resembled those of its predecessor, the Macintosh Portable. It had a Motorola 68000 processor at 16 MHz, 2-8 megabytes (MB) of RAM, a 9-inch (23 cm) monochrome backlit liquid crystal display (LCD) with 640 × 400 pixel resolution, and the System 7.0.1 operating system. It did not have a built-in floppy disk drive and was noted for its unique compact design that placed a trackball pointing device in front of the keyboard for ease of use. Apple's then-chief executive officer (CEO) John Sculley started the PowerBook project in 1990, allocating $1 million for marketing. Despite the small marketing budget, the new PowerBook line was a success, generating over $1 billion in revenue for Apple in its first year. Sony designed and manufactured the PowerBook 100 in collaboration with the Apple Industrial Design Group, Apple's internal design team. It was discontinued on September 3, 1992, and superseded by the PowerBook 145 and PowerBook Duo series. Since then, it has been praised several times for its design; PC World named the PowerBook 100 the tenth-greatest PC of all time in 2006, and US magazine Mobile PC chose the PowerBook 100 as the greatest gadget of all time in 2005. (Full article...) Image 3 State Route 527 (SR 527, also known as the Bothell–Everett Highway) is a state highway in Snohomish County, Washington. It travels 9 miles (14 km) from north to south, connecting the northern Seattle suburbs of Bothell, Mill Creek, and Everett. The highway intersects Interstate 405 (I-405) at its southern terminus, SR 96 in northern Mill Creek, and I-5 at an interchange with SR 99 and SR 526 in Everett. The Bothell–Everett Highway was built in the 1910s as part of the intercity Pacific Highway and briefly formed part of U.S. Route 99 (US 99) in 1926. The following year, US 99 was moved west to a new highway that would later become modern-day SR 99. The old route to the east was signed by the state as Secondary State Highway 2A (SSH 2A) from 1937 to 1943 and SSH 2J from 1957 to 1964, when it was renumbered as SR 527. (Full article...) Image 4 Dan Dugan (born March 20, 1943) is an American audio engineer, inventor, and nature sounds recordist. He was the first person in regional theatre to be called a sound designer, and he developed the first effective automatic microphone mixer: the automixer. Dugan's sound design work was acknowledged in 2003 with a Distinguished Career Award by the United States Institute for Theatre Technology, and in 2020 with an Emmy Award for technology relevant to remote working. In 2021 he was awarded Fellowship in the Audio Engineering Society. In his youth, Dugan was fascinated by the technical aspects of theatre. He worked as a lighting designer then transitioned to sound design in 1967. Dugan became interested in achieving the automatic adjustment of sound controls after a frustrating experience staging the musical Hair. His first automixer design was not fully practical but his second design was successful; it used a reference derived from a total of all of its microphone signals. Dugan devised a third improvement which helped prevent audio feedback in the presence of sound reinforcement loudspeakers. Dugan next produced an automixer design that could be inserted into an existing mixing console. This proved popular for broadcast and live sound applications. Each of Dugan's subsequent automixer models has been of the insertable type. (Full article...) Image 5 Interstate 405 (I-405), also known as the Stadium Freeway No. 61, is a short north–south Interstate Highway in Portland, Oregon. It forms a loop that travels around the west side of Downtown Portland, between two junctions with I-5 on the Willamette River near the Marquam Bridge to the south and Fremont Bridge to the north. The Stadium Freeway was envisioned in the 1940s and 1950s by the state government and was added to the Interstate Highway system in 1958. Construction began in 1963, utilizing a trench with extensive landscaping and frequent overpasses, and was the most expensive freeway project in state history at a cost of $121 million. Hundreds of buildings were demolished to make way for the freeway, which displaced approximately 1,100 households. (Full article...) Image 6 Exit 6 of Woodlands station Woodlands MRT station is a Singapore Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) interchange station on the North South (NSL) and Thomson–East Coast (TEL) lines. Located in Woodlands, the MRT station is the first to feature an underground bus interchange underneath the NSL station. The station is also integrated with surrounding developments, including Causeway Point and the Woodlands Civic Centre. The NSL station was first announced in November 1991 as part of the Woodlands MRT extension. Completed on 10 February 1996, the elevated station has a circular, barrel-like roof with beige and green tiles. Min Chan's Faces II sculpture is displayed near the station. (Full article...) Image 7 The Ferrari P4/5 (officially known as the Ferrari P4/5 by Pininfarina) is a one-off sports car made by Italian sports car manufacturer Ferrari but redesigned by Pininfarina for film director James Glickenhaus, son of stock exchange magnate Seth Glickenhaus. The car was initially an Enzo Ferrari but the owner James Glickenhaus preferred the styling of Ferrari's 1960s race cars, the P Series. The project cost Glickenhaus US$ 4 million and was officially presented to the public in August 2006 at the Pebble Beach Concours d'Elégance. Several websites were allowed to publish images of the clay model in July 2006. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 2 KeypunchPicture: Unknown; restoration: Mmxx A woman using a Hollerith pantograph, a machine developed by Herman Hollerith for the punching of cards, providing data which could then be processed. Such tools were used in the 1890 United States Census, the first time the country's census was tabulated by machine. More selected pictures Image 3 George Washington CarverPhoto: Arthur Rothstein; Restoration: Lise Broer A portrait of George Washington Carver, American scientist, botanist, educator and inventor, from 1942. Much of Carver's fame is based on his research into and promotion of alternative crops to cotton, such as peanuts and sweet potatoes. In addition to his work on agricultural extension education for purposes of advocacy of sustainable agriculture and appreciation of plants and nature, Carver's important accomplishments also included improvement of racial relations, mentoring children, poetry, painting, and religion. One of his most important roles was in undermining, through the fame of his achievements and many talents, the widespread stereotype of the time that the black race was intellectually inferior to the white race. More selected pictures Image 4 Trojan Room coffee potPicture: Quentin Stafford-Fraser The Trojan Room coffee pot was the inspiration for the world's first webcam. The coffee pot was located in the corridor just outside the so-called Trojan Room within the old Computer Laboratory of the University of Cambridge. The webcam was created in 1991 to help people working in other parts of the building avoid pointless trips to the coffee pot by providing, on the user's desktop computer, a live 128×128 pixel greyscale picture of the state of the coffee pot. The webcam was shut down on 22 August 2001, following the Computer Laboratory's move to the William Gates Building. More selected pictures Image 5 Commodore 64Photo: Evan Amos The Commodore 64 is an 8-bit home computer introduced in 1982 by Commodore International. Its low retail price and easy availability led to the system becoming the market leader for three years. It remains the best-selling single personal computer model of all time. More selected pictures Image 6 Flat-four enginePhotograph: ULPower Aero Engines The ULPower UL260i, a flat-four engine produced by ULPower Aero Engines of Belgium. Flat-four engines are flat engines with four cylinders arranged horizontally in two banks of two cylinders on each side of a central crankcase; they can be used in cars, motorcycles, or aircraft. This type of engine tends to be well-balanced and have efficient cooling, but is expensive to manufacture and considerably wider than other engines. More selected pictures Image 7 Wiesen ViaductPhotograph: David Gubler The Wiesen Viaduct is a single-track railway viaduct (concrete blocks with dimension stone coverage) which spans the Landwasser southwest of the hamlet of Wiesen, Switzerland. Designed by Henning Friedrich, then the chief engineer of the Rhaetian Railway, it was built between 1906 and 1909 by the contractor G. Marasi (Westermann & Cie, Zürich) under the supervision of P. Salaz and Hans Studer (RhB). The Rhaetian Railway still owns and uses the viaduct today for regular service with 29 passenger trains per day. An important element of the Davos–Filisur railway, the viaduct is 88.9 metres (292 ft) high, 210 metres (690 ft) long, and has a main span of 55 metres (180 ft). In 1926, the viaduct was the inspiration for Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's painting Brücke bei Wiesen. More selected pictures Image 8 Jet engineDiagram: Jeff Dahl A diagram of a typical turbojet engine. Air is compressed as it enters the engine, and is mixed with fuel that burns in the combustion section. Released through the exhaust, the resulting hot gases provide forward thrust and turn the turbines that drive the fan blades of the compressor. More selected pictures Image 9 Mazda RX-8Photo credit: Fir0002 The Mazda RX-8 sports car is a front mid-engine, rear-wheel drive four-seat coupé manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation. It is the successor to the RX-7 and, like its predecessors in the RX range, it is powered by a rotary engine. The RX-8 began North American sales in the 2004 model year. More selected pictures Image 10 Mark IV tankPhotograph: Peter Trimming The Mark IV tank was introduced by the British in May 1917 to fight in World War I. The "female" version, as pictured here, was armed with five machine guns. Production of the Mark IV ceased at the end of the War in 1918. A small number served briefly with other combatants afterwards. This Mark IV tank, on display in Ashford, Kent, was presented to the town after the end of World War I. The engine was removed to install an electricity substation inside it, though this substation was subsequently removed; the tank's interior is now empty. More selected pictures Image 11 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 12 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 13 Mechanical advantageImage credit: Prolineserver/Tomia This diagram of four pulley systems illustrates how increasing the number of pulleys increases the mechanical advantage, making the load easier to lift. MA is the factor by which a mechanism multiplies the force put into it. In this diagram, 100 newtons is required to lift the weight off the ground. Each additional pulley increases the MA such that the four-pulley system only needs 25 newtons to accomplish the same task, but the rope must be pulled four times as far. More selected pictures Image 14 Nuclear weaponImage credit: Fastfission Schematic representation of the two methods with which to assemble an atomic bomb. An A-bomb produces its explosive energy through nuclear fission reactions alone. A mass of fissile material (enriched uranium or plutonium) is assembled into a supercritical mass—the amount of material needed to start an exponentially growing nuclear chain reaction—either by shooting one piece of sub-critical material into another (the "gun" method, shown on top here), or by compressing a sub-critical sphere of material using chemical explosives to many times its original density (the "implosion" method, at bottom). More selected pictures Image 15 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 16 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 17 David FaimanPhotograph: David Shankbone David Faiman is an Israeli engineer and physicist recognized for his expertise on solar power. He is the director of the Ben-Gurion National Solar Energy Center and Chairman of the Department of Solar Energy & Environmental Physics at Ben-Gurion University's Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research in Sde Boker. More selected pictures Image 18 Four-stroke cyclePhoto credit: Eric Pierce The four-stroke cycle of an internal combustion engine is the cycle most commonly used for automotive and industrial purposes today, including cars, trucks, and generators. The cycle was invented by Nikolaus Otto in 1876, and is also called the Otto cycle. The cycle is characterized by four strokes, or straight movements in a single direction, of the piston. More selected pictures Image 19 Soyuz MSDiagram credit: AstroBidules The Soyuz MS is the latest revision of the Russian spacecraft series Soyuz. It is an evolution of the Soyuz TMA-M, with modernization mostly concentrated on its communications and navigation subsystems. The spacecraft is used by Roscosmos for human spaceflight. The Soyuz MS has minimal external changes with respect to the Soyuz TMA-M, mostly limited to antennas and sensors, as well as the thruster placement. The first launch, Soyuz MS-01, took place on 7 July 2016 aboard a Soyuz-FG launch vehicle towards the International Space Station. This exploded-view diagram illustrates and labels various components of the Soyuz MS spacecraft and the Soyuz-FG rocket. More selected pictures Image 20 Red telephone boxPhotograph: Christoph Braun A 'K6' model red telephone box outside of St Paul's Cathedral in London. These kiosks for a public telephone were designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott and painted "currant red" for easy visibility. Although such telephone boxes ceased production when the KX series was introduced in 1985, they remain a common sight in Britain and some of its colonies, and are considered a British cultural icon. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Romanian neuroscientist Viviana Gradinaru was part of the research team from Caltech that found that serotonin is necessary for sleep in zebrafish and mice? ... that racing driver James Sofronas worked as a salesman for a technology company to buy the Nissan NX 2000 required for his first competitive race? ... that Alejandro Finocchiaro, Argentina's current Minister of Education, Culture, Science and Technology, produced the 2008 documentary Mujeres de la Shoá ('Women of the Holocaust')? ... that while raising two young children, Li Minhua became the first woman to earn a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at MIT? ... that Karlin Lillington, long-time technology writer for Ireland's newspaper of record, The Irish Times, holds a PhD on the poetry of Seamus Heaney? ... that Andrew Niikondo, acting vice-chancellor of the Namibia University of Science and Technology, completed his secondary school education only at age 30? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. A centibillionaire, Musk is the richest person in the world as of November 2021. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 photo courtesy of Todd W. White John Kenneth Hilliard (October 1901 – March 21, 1989) was an American acoustical and electrical engineer who pioneered a number of important loudspeaker concepts and designs. He helped develop the practical use of recording sound for film, and won an Academy Award in 1935. He designed movie theater sound systems, and he worked on radar as well as submarine detection equipment during World War II. Hilliard collaborated with James B. "Jim" Lansing in creating the long-lived Altec Voice of the Theatre speaker system. Hilliard researched high-intensity acoustics, vibration, miniaturization and long-line communications for NASA and the Air Force. Near the end of his career, he standardized noise-control criteria for home construction in California, a pattern since applied to new homes throughout the U.S. (Full article...) Image 2 PowerBook 150 The PowerBook 100 is a portable subnotebook personal computer designed and manufactured by Sony for Apple Computer and introduced on October 21, 1991, at the COMDEX computer expo in Las Vegas, Nevada. Priced at US$2,500 with external floppy drive, the PowerBook 100 was the low-end model of the first three simultaneously released PowerBooks. Its CPU and overall speed closely resembled those of its predecessor, the Macintosh Portable. It had a Motorola 68000 processor at 16 MHz, 2-8 megabytes (MB) of RAM, a 9-inch (23 cm) monochrome backlit liquid crystal display (LCD) with 640 × 400 pixel resolution, and the System 7.0.1 operating system. It did not have a built-in floppy disk drive and was noted for its unique compact design that placed a trackball pointing device in front of the keyboard for ease of use. Apple's then-chief executive officer (CEO) John Sculley started the PowerBook project in 1990, allocating $1 million for marketing. Despite the small marketing budget, the new PowerBook line was a success, generating over $1 billion in revenue for Apple in its first year. Sony designed and manufactured the PowerBook 100 in collaboration with the Apple Industrial Design Group, Apple's internal design team. It was discontinued on September 3, 1992, and superseded by the PowerBook 145 and PowerBook Duo series. Since then, it has been praised several times for its design; PC World named the PowerBook 100 the tenth-greatest PC of all time in 2006, and US magazine Mobile PC chose the PowerBook 100 as the greatest gadget of all time in 2005. (Full article...) Image 3 State Route 527 (SR 527, also known as the Bothell–Everett Highway) is a state highway in Snohomish County, Washington. It travels 9 miles (14 km) from north to south, connecting the northern Seattle suburbs of Bothell, Mill Creek, and Everett. The highway intersects Interstate 405 (I-405) at its southern terminus, SR 96 in northern Mill Creek, and I-5 at an interchange with SR 99 and SR 526 in Everett. The Bothell–Everett Highway was built in the 1910s as part of the intercity Pacific Highway and briefly formed part of U.S. Route 99 (US 99) in 1926. The following year, US 99 was moved west to a new highway that would later become modern-day SR 99. The old route to the east was signed by the state as Secondary State Highway 2A (SSH 2A) from 1937 to 1943 and SSH 2J from 1957 to 1964, when it was renumbered as SR 527. (Full article...) Image 4 Dan Dugan (born March 20, 1943) is an American audio engineer, inventor, and nature sounds recordist. He was the first person in regional theatre to be called a sound designer, and he developed the first effective automatic microphone mixer: the automixer. Dugan's sound design work was acknowledged in 2003 with a Distinguished Career Award by the United States Institute for Theatre Technology, and in 2020 with an Emmy Award for technology relevant to remote working. In 2021 he was awarded Fellowship in the Audio Engineering Society. In his youth, Dugan was fascinated by the technical aspects of theatre. He worked as a lighting designer then transitioned to sound design in 1967. Dugan became interested in achieving the automatic adjustment of sound controls after a frustrating experience staging the musical Hair. His first automixer design was not fully practical but his second design was successful; it used a reference derived from a total of all of its microphone signals. Dugan devised a third improvement which helped prevent audio feedback in the presence of sound reinforcement loudspeakers. Dugan next produced an automixer design that could be inserted into an existing mixing console. This proved popular for broadcast and live sound applications. Each of Dugan's subsequent automixer models has been of the insertable type. (Full article...) Image 5 Interstate 405 (I-405), also known as the Stadium Freeway No. 61, is a short north–south Interstate Highway in Portland, Oregon. It forms a loop that travels around the west side of Downtown Portland, between two junctions with I-5 on the Willamette River near the Marquam Bridge to the south and Fremont Bridge to the north. The Stadium Freeway was envisioned in the 1940s and 1950s by the state government and was added to the Interstate Highway system in 1958. Construction began in 1963, utilizing a trench with extensive landscaping and frequent overpasses, and was the most expensive freeway project in state history at a cost of $121 million. Hundreds of buildings were demolished to make way for the freeway, which displaced approximately 1,100 households. (Full article...) Image 6 Exit 6 of Woodlands station Woodlands MRT station is a Singapore Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) interchange station on the North South (NSL) and Thomson–East Coast (TEL) lines. Located in Woodlands, the MRT station is the first to feature an underground bus interchange underneath the NSL station. The station is also integrated with surrounding developments, including Causeway Point and the Woodlands Civic Centre. The NSL station was first announced in November 1991 as part of the Woodlands MRT extension. Completed on 10 February 1996, the elevated station has a circular, barrel-like roof with beige and green tiles. Min Chan's Faces II sculpture is displayed near the station. (Full article...) Image 7 The Ferrari P4/5 (officially known as the Ferrari P4/5 by Pininfarina) is a one-off sports car made by Italian sports car manufacturer Ferrari but redesigned by Pininfarina for film director James Glickenhaus, son of stock exchange magnate Seth Glickenhaus. The car was initially an Enzo Ferrari but the owner James Glickenhaus preferred the styling of Ferrari's 1960s race cars, the P Series. The project cost Glickenhaus US$ 4 million and was officially presented to the public in August 2006 at the Pebble Beach Concours d'Elégance. Several websites were allowed to publish images of the clay model in July 2006. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 2 KeypunchPicture: Unknown; restoration: Mmxx A woman using a Hollerith pantograph, a machine developed by Herman Hollerith for the punching of cards, providing data which could then be processed. Such tools were used in the 1890 United States Census, the first time the country's census was tabulated by machine. More selected pictures Image 3 George Washington CarverPhoto: Arthur Rothstein; Restoration: Lise Broer A portrait of George Washington Carver, American scientist, botanist, educator and inventor, from 1942. Much of Carver's fame is based on his research into and promotion of alternative crops to cotton, such as peanuts and sweet potatoes. In addition to his work on agricultural extension education for purposes of advocacy of sustainable agriculture and appreciation of plants and nature, Carver's important accomplishments also included improvement of racial relations, mentoring children, poetry, painting, and religion. One of his most important roles was in undermining, through the fame of his achievements and many talents, the widespread stereotype of the time that the black race was intellectually inferior to the white race. More selected pictures Image 4 Trojan Room coffee potPicture: Quentin Stafford-Fraser The Trojan Room coffee pot was the inspiration for the world's first webcam. The coffee pot was located in the corridor just outside the so-called Trojan Room within the old Computer Laboratory of the University of Cambridge. The webcam was created in 1991 to help people working in other parts of the building avoid pointless trips to the coffee pot by providing, on the user's desktop computer, a live 128×128 pixel greyscale picture of the state of the coffee pot. The webcam was shut down on 22 August 2001, following the Computer Laboratory's move to the William Gates Building. More selected pictures Image 5 Commodore 64Photo: Evan Amos The Commodore 64 is an 8-bit home computer introduced in 1982 by Commodore International. Its low retail price and easy availability led to the system becoming the market leader for three years. It remains the best-selling single personal computer model of all time. More selected pictures Image 6 Flat-four enginePhotograph: ULPower Aero Engines The ULPower UL260i, a flat-four engine produced by ULPower Aero Engines of Belgium. Flat-four engines are flat engines with four cylinders arranged horizontally in two banks of two cylinders on each side of a central crankcase; they can be used in cars, motorcycles, or aircraft. This type of engine tends to be well-balanced and have efficient cooling, but is expensive to manufacture and considerably wider than other engines. More selected pictures Image 7 Wiesen ViaductPhotograph: David Gubler The Wiesen Viaduct is a single-track railway viaduct (concrete blocks with dimension stone coverage) which spans the Landwasser southwest of the hamlet of Wiesen, Switzerland. Designed by Henning Friedrich, then the chief engineer of the Rhaetian Railway, it was built between 1906 and 1909 by the contractor G. Marasi (Westermann & Cie, Zürich) under the supervision of P. Salaz and Hans Studer (RhB). The Rhaetian Railway still owns and uses the viaduct today for regular service with 29 passenger trains per day. An important element of the Davos–Filisur railway, the viaduct is 88.9 metres (292 ft) high, 210 metres (690 ft) long, and has a main span of 55 metres (180 ft). In 1926, the viaduct was the inspiration for Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's painting Brücke bei Wiesen. More selected pictures Image 8 Jet engineDiagram: Jeff Dahl A diagram of a typical turbojet engine. Air is compressed as it enters the engine, and is mixed with fuel that burns in the combustion section. Released through the exhaust, the resulting hot gases provide forward thrust and turn the turbines that drive the fan blades of the compressor. More selected pictures Image 9 Mazda RX-8Photo credit: Fir0002 The Mazda RX-8 sports car is a front mid-engine, rear-wheel drive four-seat coupé manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation. It is the successor to the RX-7 and, like its predecessors in the RX range, it is powered by a rotary engine. The RX-8 began North American sales in the 2004 model year. More selected pictures Image 10 Mark IV tankPhotograph: Peter Trimming The Mark IV tank was introduced by the British in May 1917 to fight in World War I. The "female" version, as pictured here, was armed with five machine guns. Production of the Mark IV ceased at the end of the War in 1918. A small number served briefly with other combatants afterwards. This Mark IV tank, on display in Ashford, Kent, was presented to the town after the end of World War I. The engine was removed to install an electricity substation inside it, though this substation was subsequently removed; the tank's interior is now empty. More selected pictures Image 11 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 12 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 13 Mechanical advantageImage credit: Prolineserver/Tomia This diagram of four pulley systems illustrates how increasing the number of pulleys increases the mechanical advantage, making the load easier to lift. MA is the factor by which a mechanism multiplies the force put into it. In this diagram, 100 newtons is required to lift the weight off the ground. Each additional pulley increases the MA such that the four-pulley system only needs 25 newtons to accomplish the same task, but the rope must be pulled four times as far. More selected pictures Image 14 Nuclear weaponImage credit: Fastfission Schematic representation of the two methods with which to assemble an atomic bomb. An A-bomb produces its explosive energy through nuclear fission reactions alone. A mass of fissile material (enriched uranium or plutonium) is assembled into a supercritical mass—the amount of material needed to start an exponentially growing nuclear chain reaction—either by shooting one piece of sub-critical material into another (the "gun" method, shown on top here), or by compressing a sub-critical sphere of material using chemical explosives to many times its original density (the "implosion" method, at bottom). More selected pictures Image 15 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 16 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 17 David FaimanPhotograph: David Shankbone David Faiman is an Israeli engineer and physicist recognized for his expertise on solar power. He is the director of the Ben-Gurion National Solar Energy Center and Chairman of the Department of Solar Energy & Environmental Physics at Ben-Gurion University's Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research in Sde Boker. More selected pictures Image 18 Four-stroke cyclePhoto credit: Eric Pierce The four-stroke cycle of an internal combustion engine is the cycle most commonly used for automotive and industrial purposes today, including cars, trucks, and generators. The cycle was invented by Nikolaus Otto in 1876, and is also called the Otto cycle. The cycle is characterized by four strokes, or straight movements in a single direction, of the piston. More selected pictures Image 19 Soyuz MSDiagram credit: AstroBidules The Soyuz MS is the latest revision of the Russian spacecraft series Soyuz. It is an evolution of the Soyuz TMA-M, with modernization mostly concentrated on its communications and navigation subsystems. The spacecraft is used by Roscosmos for human spaceflight. The Soyuz MS has minimal external changes with respect to the Soyuz TMA-M, mostly limited to antennas and sensors, as well as the thruster placement. The first launch, Soyuz MS-01, took place on 7 July 2016 aboard a Soyuz-FG launch vehicle towards the International Space Station. This exploded-view diagram illustrates and labels various components of the Soyuz MS spacecraft and the Soyuz-FG rocket. More selected pictures Image 20 Red telephone boxPhotograph: Christoph Braun A 'K6' model red telephone box outside of St Paul's Cathedral in London. These kiosks for a public telephone were designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott and painted "currant red" for easy visibility. Although such telephone boxes ceased production when the KX series was introduced in 1985, they remain a common sight in Britain and some of its colonies, and are considered a British cultural icon. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Romanian neuroscientist Viviana Gradinaru was part of the research team from Caltech that found that serotonin is necessary for sleep in zebrafish and mice? ... that racing driver James Sofronas worked as a salesman for a technology company to buy the Nissan NX 2000 required for his first competitive race? ... that Alejandro Finocchiaro, Argentina's current Minister of Education, Culture, Science and Technology, produced the 2008 documentary Mujeres de la Shoá ('Women of the Holocaust')? ... that while raising two young children, Li Minhua became the first woman to earn a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at MIT? ... that Karlin Lillington, long-time technology writer for Ireland's newspaper of record, The Irish Times, holds a PhD on the poetry of Seamus Heaney? ... that Andrew Niikondo, acting vice-chancellor of the Namibia University of Science and Technology, completed his secondary school education only at age 30? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. A centibillionaire, Musk is the richest person in the world as of November 2021. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 State Route 142 (SR 142) is a state highway in southern Washington. It is located entirely within Klickitat County and runs east–west for 35 miles (56 km) from Lyle to Goldendale. The highway terminates at SR 14 in Lyle and U.S. Route 97 (US 97) in Goldendale. The highway follows the Klickitat River and an abandoned railroad grade that was built in 1903 and converted into a recreational trail in the 1990s. The county government built a road through the Klickitat River Canyon in 1934 and transferred it to state control in the 1960s, when it was designated as Secondary State Highway 8E (SSH 8E). The highway was initially renumbered to SR 122, but instead became SR 142 in 1967. (Full article...) Image 2 Chinook HC6A of 18 Sqn RAF in 2020 The Boeing Chinook is a large, tandem rotor helicopter operated by the Royal Air Force (RAF). A series of variants based on the United States Army's Boeing CH-47 Chinook, the RAF Chinook fleet is the largest outside the United States. RAF Chinooks have seen extensive service in the Falklands War, the Balkans, Northern Ireland, Iraq, and Afghanistan. The Chinook aircraft, normally based at RAF Odiham, provides heavy-lift support and transport across all branches of the British armed forces. The RAF has a total of 60 Chinooks in active inventory as of 2015. In 2018, the UK issued a request to the United States to purchase 16 additional aircraft. The Chinook is expected to remain in RAF service until the 2040s. (Full article...) Image 3 The relationships between digital media use and mental health have been investigated by various researchers—predominantly psychologists, sociologists, anthropologists, and medical experts—especially since the mid-1990s, after the growth of the World Wide Web. A significant body of research has explored "overuse" phenomena, commonly known as "digital addictions", or "digital dependencies". These phenomena manifest differently in many societies and cultures. Some experts have investigated the benefits of moderate digital media use in various domains, including in mental health, and the treatment of mental health problems with novel technological solutions. The delineation between beneficial and pathological use of digital media has not been established. There are no widely accepted diagnostic criteria, although some experts consider overuse a manifestation of underlying psychiatric disorders. The prevention and treatment of pathological digital media use is also not standardised, although guidelines for safer media use for children and families have been developed. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) and the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-11) do not include diagnoses for problematic internet use and problematic social media use; the ICD-11 include diagnosis for gaming disorder (commonly known as video game addiction), whereas the DSM-5 does not. Experts are still debating how and when to diagnose these conditions. The use of the term addiction to refer to these phenomena and diagnoses has also been questioned. (Full article...) Image 4 The Pennsylvania Turnpike (Penna Turnpike or PA Turnpike) is a toll highway operated by the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission (PTC) in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania. A controlled-access highway, it runs for 360 miles (580 km) across the state. The turnpike's western terminus is at the Ohio state line in Lawrence County, where the road continues west as the Ohio Turnpike. The eastern terminus is at the New Jersey state line at the Delaware River–Turnpike Toll Bridge over the Delaware River in Bucks County, where the road continues east as the Pearl Harbor Memorial Extension of the New Jersey Turnpike. The highway runs east–west through the southern part of the state, connecting the Pittsburgh, Harrisburg, and Philadelphia areas. It crosses the Appalachian Mountains in central Pennsylvania, passing through four tunnels. The turnpike is part of the Interstate Highway System; it is designated as part of Interstate 76 (I-76) between the Ohio border and Valley Forge, I-70 (concurrent with I-76) between New Stanton and Breezewood, I-276 between Valley Forge and Bristol Township, and I-95 from Bristol Township to the New Jersey border. The road uses an all-electronic tolling system; tolls can be paid using E-ZPass or toll-by-plate (which uses automatic license plate recognition). Cash tolls were phased out between January 2016 and March 2020. Along the turnpike are 15 service plazas, providing food and fuel to travelers. (Full article...) Image 5 Pennsylvania Route 179 (PA 179) and Route 179 is an 8.7-mile (14.00 km) state highway in Bucks County, Pennsylvania and Hunterdon County, New Jersey, United States, running along an old alignment of U.S. Route 202 (US 202) from west of New Hope, Pennsylvania northeast through Lambertville, New Jersey to Ringoes, where it ends at an intersection with US 202 and Route 31. Past this intersection, the road continues east as County Route 514 (CR 514). It is two-lane, undivided highway for most of its length with the exception of a four-lane stretch in Lambertville. The route crosses the Delaware River on the New Hope-Lambertville Bridge, where the designation changes from PA 179 to Route 179. PA 179 and Route 179 follow a part of the 18th-century Old York Road which ran between Philadelphia and New York City. Prior to 1953, the road was Route S29 from the Delaware River to downtown Lambertville, a part of Route 29 between Lambertville and Ringoes, and a concurrency of Route 29 and Route 30 in Ringoes. The route was also part of US 202, which was designated over 1926-created US 122 in the mid-1930s. In 1953, the Route S29 and 29 designations were removed in favor of US 202 and Route 30 became Route 69 (now Route 31). Route 179 was formed in 1965 when a bypass for Ringoes was built for US 202 and Route 69. Route 179 extended to Lambertville and PA 179 was created in 1974 when the new US 202 freeway, running over the New Hope-Lambertville Toll Bridge, was completed. (Full article...) Image 6 The site of the former Pill railway station in 2009, looking west towards Portishead. Pill railway station was a railway station on the Portishead Branch Line, 7.8 miles (12.6 km) west of Bristol Temple Meads, serving the village of Pill in North Somerset, England. The station was opened by the Bristol and Portishead Pier and Railway Company on 18 April 1867. It had two platforms, on either side of a passing loop, with a goods yard and signal box later additions. Services increased until the 1930s, at which point a half-hourly service operated. However the Portishead Branch was recommended for closure by the Beeching report, and the station was closed on 7 September 1964, although the line saw freight traffic until 1981. Regular freight trains through the station began to run again in 2002 when Royal Portbury Dock was connected to the rail network. The station is due to be reopened to passenger traffic as part of MetroWest, a scheme to increase rail services in the Bristol area. The new station will have a single platform, an accessible footbridge and a car park, with trains running between Portishead and Bristol. (Full article...) Image 7 Lynemouth Power Station from Cresswell Lynemouth Power Station is a biomass power plant which provides electricity for the UK National Grid. Until March 2012, it was the main source of electricity for the nearby Alcan Lynemouth Aluminium Smelter. It is located on the coast of Northumberland, north east of the town of Ashington in north east England. The station has stood as a landmark on the Northumberland coast since it opened in 1972, and had been privately owned by aluminium company Rio Tinto Alcan throughout its operation until December 2013, when RWE npower took over. In January 2016 it was acquired by Energetický a pr?myslový holding. The station is one of the most recently built coal-fired power stations in the United Kingdom, but with a generating capacity of only 420 megawatts (MW), was one of the smallest. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 Australia Telescope Compact ArrayPhotograph credit: John Masterson, CSIRO; restored by Bammesk The Australia Telescope Compact Array is a radio telescope operated by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) at the Paul Wild Observatory, 25 km (16 mi) west of the town of Narrabri in New South Wales, Australia. The telescope is an array of six identical dishes each 22 metres (72 ft) in diameter, which commonly operate in aperture synthesis mode to produce images from radio waves. Five of the dishes can be moved along a 3-kilometre (2 mi) railway track; the sixth is situated three kilometres west of the end of the main track. Each dish weighs about 270 tonnes (270 long tons; 300 short tons). This photograph, showing five of the Australia Telescope Compact Array's dishes, was taken around 1984, in the late phase of the construction process. It is a long-exposure photograph taken in darkness in the late evening; during the exposure, the photographer, John Masterson, walked around the dishes firing off over 130 flashes using a hand-held flash gun. More selected pictures Image 2 Flat-four enginePhotograph: ULPower Aero Engines The ULPower UL260i, a flat-four engine produced by ULPower Aero Engines of Belgium. Flat-four engines are flat engines with four cylinders arranged horizontally in two banks of two cylinders on each side of a central crankcase; they can be used in cars, motorcycles, or aircraft. This type of engine tends to be well-balanced and have efficient cooling, but is expensive to manufacture and considerably wider than other engines. More selected pictures Image 3 Stockwell GaragePhotograph: David Iliff An interior view of Stockwell Garage, a large bus garage in Stockwell, London, designed by Adie, Button and Partners and opened in 1952. The 393-foot-long (120 m) roof structure, seen here, is supported by ten very shallow "two-hinged" arched ribs, between which are cantilevered barrel vaults topped by large skylights. The garage, which could originally hold 200 buses, has been a Grade II* Listed Building since 1988. More selected pictures Image 4 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 5 Burj KhalifaPhotograph: Donald Y Tong Burj Khalifa is a skyscraper in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, and currently the tallest man-made structure in the world, at 829.8 m (2,722 ft). It was designed to be the centerpiece of a large-scale, mixed-use development known as Downtown Dubai. Construction took over five years, and the skyscraper was officially opened in January 2010. More selected pictures Image 6 Mark IV tankPhotograph: Peter Trimming The Mark IV tank was introduced by the British in May 1917 to fight in World War I. The "female" version, as pictured here, was armed with five machine guns. Production of the Mark IV ceased at the end of the War in 1918. A small number served briefly with other combatants afterwards. This Mark IV tank, on display in Ashford, Kent, was presented to the town after the end of World War I. The engine was removed to install an electricity substation inside it, though this substation was subsequently removed; the tank's interior is now empty. More selected pictures Image 7 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 8 Apple Bandai PippinPhotograph: Evan Amos The Apple Bandai Pippin is a multimedia technology console designed by Apple Computer based on the Apple Pippin platform, and produced by Bandai. Only 100,000 of the consoles were produced between its 1996 release and 1997 discontinuation. The Bandai Pippin was intended to create an inexpensive computer aimed mostly at playing CD-based multimedia software, especially games, but also functioning as a thin client. More selected pictures Image 9 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 10 Filling stationPhotograph: Uwe Aranas A filling station in Sabah, Malaysia, operated by Royal Dutch Shell. Filling stations, also known under a wide variety of names, are facilities that sell fuel and engine lubricants for motor vehicles. They include one or more fuel dispensers, which distribute fuels such as gasoline and diesel into the tanks within vehicles and calculate the financial cost of the fuel transferred. Filling stations may also include air compressors and electricity sockets, which may inflate tyres or offer charging stations. Many filling stations also incorporate a convenience store, where customers can purchase snacks and other goods. More selected pictures Image 11 SOCATA TBMPhotograph credit: Michael Mainiero The SOCATA TBM (now Daher TBM) is a family of high-performance single-engine turboprop business and utility light aircraft manufactured by Daher. This SOCATA TBM 900 was photographed in flight during the 2015 EAA AirVenture Oshkosh airshow in the U.S. state of Wisconsin. The aircraft features a Pratt & Whitney Canada PT6A-64 engine, and a five-blade carbon-fiber propeller, which increases performance and decreases cabin noise. In a passenger configuration, the pressurized cabin is typically fitted with highly finished interiors, featuring luxury materials such as leather and wood veneers. More selected pictures Image 12 Sukhoi Su-30Photo: Sergey Krivchikov The Sukhoi Su-30 is a twin-engine, two-seat supermanoeuverable fighter aircraft developed by Russia's Sukhoi Aviation Corporation. It is a multirole fighter for all-weather, air-to-air and air-to-surface deep interdiction missions. Its primary users are Russia, India, China, Venezuela, and Malaysia. More selected pictures Image 13 William CrooksPhotograph: National Photo Company, Restoration: Adam Cuerden The William Crooks is a 4-4-0 steam locomotive that was the first locomotive to operate in the U.S. state of Minnesota, beginning in 1861. It was named after William Crooks, the chief mechanical engineer for the St. Paul and Pacific Railroad, who earlier served as a colonel in the 6th Minnesota Volunteer Infantry Regiment during the American Civil War. Crooks laid out the initial ten-mile track between Minneapolis and St. Paul on which the locomotive operated. It was retired from regular service in 1897, but operated special services for several further decades. It is now in the Lake Superior Railroad Museum in Duluth. More selected pictures Image 14 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 15 John HerschelPhotograph: Julia Margaret Cameron; restoration: Adam Cuerden John Herschel was an English mathematician, astronomer, chemist, inventor, and experimental photographer. He named seven moons of Saturn and four moons of Uranus, invented the cyanotype and actinometer, and wrote extensively on topics including meteorology, physical geography and the telescope. More selected pictures Image 16 Soyuz MSDiagram credit: AstroBidules The Soyuz MS is the latest revision of the Russian spacecraft series Soyuz. It is an evolution of the Soyuz TMA-M, with modernization mostly concentrated on its communications and navigation subsystems. The spacecraft is used by Roscosmos for human spaceflight. The Soyuz MS has minimal external changes with respect to the Soyuz TMA-M, mostly limited to antennas and sensors, as well as the thruster placement. The first launch, Soyuz MS-01, took place on 7 July 2016 aboard a Soyuz-FG launch vehicle towards the International Space Station. This exploded-view diagram illustrates and labels various components of the Soyuz MS spacecraft and the Soyuz-FG rocket. More selected pictures Image 17 Mechanical advantageImage credit: Prolineserver/Tomia This diagram of four pulley systems illustrates how increasing the number of pulleys increases the mechanical advantage, making the load easier to lift. MA is the factor by which a mechanism multiplies the force put into it. In this diagram, 100 newtons is required to lift the weight off the ground. Each additional pulley increases the MA such that the four-pulley system only needs 25 newtons to accomplish the same task, but the rope must be pulled four times as far. More selected pictures Image 18 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 19 Kitty JoynerPhotograph: NACA Kitty Joyner (1916–1993) was an American electrical engineer with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), and then the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). She was hired in 1939 as the organization's first woman engineer, shortly after she had become the first woman to graduate from the University of Virginia's engineering program. More selected pictures Image 20 Semi-submersiblePhoto: Agência Brasil The semi-submersible oil platform P-51, operated by Brazilian energy company Petrobras, being positioned by tugboats. Semisubs sit on pontoons located under the ocean surface, with the operating deck atop columns, above the sea level. In this manner, they are relatively protected from wave action. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Wu Ziliang developed the technology to separate uranium-235 for China's first nuclear bomb? ... that Karlin Lillington, long-time technology writer for Ireland's newspaper of record, The Irish Times, holds a PhD on the poetry of Seamus Heaney? ... that the Society for the History of Technology gave Canadian historian Joy Parr a medal for lifetime achievement in technology history and awarded her book Sensing Changes the Edelstein Prize? ... that Alejandro Finocchiaro, Argentina's current Minister of Education, Culture, Science and Technology, produced the 2008 documentary Mujeres de la Shoá ('Women of the Holocaust')? ... that racing driver James Sofronas worked as a salesman for a technology company to buy the Nissan NX 2000 required for his first competitive race? ... that Romanian neuroscientist Viviana Gradinaru was part of the research team from Caltech that found that serotonin is necessary for sleep in zebrafish and mice? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. A centibillionaire, Musk is the richest person in the world as of November 2021. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 De Akkermolen (Dutch pronunciation: [d? ???k?rmo?l?(n)]; English: The Field Mill) is a 17th-century windmill in Zundert, Netherlands. Built around 1605 to replace an earlier windmill, it was used as a gristmill until it was severely damaged in 1950. The mill was bought by the local government and restored in 1961, and it was listed as a national heritage site in 1974. (Full article...) Image 2 The ZenFone 6 is a 2019 Android-based smartphone that was manufactured, released, and marketed by Asus. It is the only release in Asus' sixth-generation ZenFone lineup and directly succeeds the ZenFone 5Z. Asus chairman Jonney Shih unveiled the ZenFone 6 on 16 May 2019 in Valencia, Spain, and was released in Spain the following day. The ZenFone 6 has a larger 6.4-inch (160 mm) display, a faster processor, and upgraded cameras than the ZenFone 5Z. The ZenFone 6's flip-up camera module doubles as a front-facing camera. It is the first mobile device Asus released after restructuring its smartphone division in late 2018. The ZenFone 6 was released in the Indian market as the "Asus 6Z". (Full article...) Image 3 Southbound platform Astor Place, also called Astor Place–Cooper Union on signs, is a local station on the IRT Lexington Avenue Line of the New York City Subway. Located at Fourth Avenue, Cooper Square, and Astor Place between the East Village and NoHo, it is served by 6 trains at all times, <6> trains during weekdays in the peak direction, and 4 trains during late night hours. The Astor Place station was constructed for the Interborough Rapid Transit Company (IRT) as part of the city's first subway line, which was approved in 1900. Construction of the line segment that includes the Astor Place station started on September 12 of the same year. The station opened on October 27, 1904, as one of the original 28 stations of the New York City Subway. The station's platforms were lengthened in the late 1950s, and the station was renovated in the mid-1980s. (Full article...) Image 4 Grand Central Terminal (GCT; also referred to as Grand Central Station or simply as Grand Central) is a commuter rail terminal located at 42nd Street and Park Avenue in Midtown Manhattan, New York City. Grand Central is the southern terminus of the Metro-North Railroad's Harlem, Hudson and New Haven Lines, serving the northern parts of the New York metropolitan area. It also contains a connection to the New York City Subway at Grand Central–42nd Street station. The terminal is the second-busiest train station in North America, after New York Penn Station. The distinctive architecture and interior design of Grand Central Terminal's station house have earned it several landmark designations, including as a National Historic Landmark. Its Beaux-Arts design incorporates numerous works of art. Grand Central Terminal is one of the world's ten most visited tourist attractions, with 21.6 million visitors in 2018, excluding train and subway passengers. The terminal's Main Concourse is often used as a meeting place, and is especially featured in films and television. Grand Central Terminal contains a variety of stores and food vendors, including upscale restaurants and bars, two food halls, and a grocery marketplace. (Full article...) Image 5 King's Highway 32, commonly referred to as Highway 32, was a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario. The 19.6-kilometre (12.2 mi)-long route connected Highway 2 in Gananoque with Highway 15 east of Seeleys Bay, providing a quick alternative route between the two highways. It also featured an interchange with Highway 401. Highway 32 was assumed in 1929, and generally remained unchanged throughout its existence until 1998, when it was decommissioned and transferred to the United Counties of Leeds and Grenville. It was subsequently redesignated as Leeds and Grenville County Road 32. (Full article...) Image 6 This is how forecast model tracks appear within ATCF. This example is from 2006 Ernesto's first advisory. The NHC official forecast is light blue, while the storm's actual track is the white line over Florida. The Automated Tropical Cyclone Forecasting System (ATCF) is a piece of software originally developed to run on a personal computer for the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) in 1988, and the National Hurricane Center (NHC) in 1990. ATCF remains the main piece of forecasting software used for the United States Government, including the JTWC, NHC, and Central Pacific Hurricane Center. Other tropical cyclone centers in Australia and Canada developed similar software in the 1990s. The data files with ATCF lie within three decks, known as the a-, b-, and f-decks. The a-decks include forecast information, the b-decks contain a history of center fixes at synoptic hours, and the f-decks include the various fixes made by various analysis center at various times. In the years since its introduction, it has been adapted to Unix and Linux platforms. (Full article...) Image 7 Class 93 at Åndalsnes Åndalsnes Station (Norwegian: Åndalsnes stasjon) is a railway station in the town of Åndalsnes, the administrative centre of Rauma Municipality in Møre og Romsdal county, Norway. It has been the terminal station of the Rauma Line since the line was extended to Åndalsnes on 30 November 1924. The station was designed by Gudmund Hoel and is located on reclaimed land along the Isfjorden. To get the line to the station, a cutting had to be built. In addition to a station building, the station has an engine shed and a bus station; the station building is next to a cruise ship port. It serves four passenger trains per day, and has correspondence by bus onwards to the nearby towns of Molde and Ålesund. The station is manned and features a chapel within a retired train carriage. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 2 Pin tumbler lockPhoto credit: Eric Pierce The pin tumbler lock is a lock mechanism that utilizes a group of pins of varying lengths to prevent opening the lock without the correct key. Pin tumblers are most commonly employed in cylinder locks, but may also be found in tubular or radial locks. When the correct key is inserted, the gaps between the key pins (red) and driver pins (blue) align with the edge of the plug (yellow). More selected pictures Image 3 Eiffel TowerPhoto: Benh Lieu Song The Eiffel Tower as seen from the Champ de Mars. At 324 metres (1,063 ft) tall, the tower, an iron lattice tower, is the tallest building in Paris, the most-visited paid monument in the world, as well as one of the most recognizable structures in the world. Named after its designer, Gustave Eiffel, it was built as an entrance arch for the 1889 Exposition Universelle and has since become the most prominent symbol of both Paris and France. More selected pictures Image 4 Semi-trailer truckDiagram: H Padleckas and Ju gatsu mikka A diagram showing a side and underside view of an 18-wheeler semi-trailer truck with an enclosed cargo space. The underside view shows the arrangement of the wheels, and in blue, the axles, drive shaft, and differentials. The numbered parts are: '"`UNIQ--templatestyles-00000010-QINU`"' #tractor unit #semi-trailer (detachable) #engine compartment #cabin #sleeper (not present in all trucks) #air dam #fuel tanks #fifth-wheel coupling #enclosed cargo space #landing gear (legs for when semi-trailer is detached) #tandem axles More selected pictures Image 5 Let L-410 TurboletPhoto: ?ukasz Golowanow The Let L-410 Turbolet is a twin-engined short-range transport aircraft, manufactured by the Czech aircraft manufacturer LET, mostly used for passenger transport. The L-410 first flew in 1969, and with more than 1100 produced, is the most popular 19-seat plane in history. More selected pictures Image 6 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 7 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 8 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 9 Building implosionPhoto credit: Heptagon A multiple exposure composite image of the implosion of a chimney at the former brewery "Henninger" in Frankfurt am Main, Germany. This controlled demolition technique involves strategically placing explosive material and timing its detonation so that a structure collapses on itself in a matter of seconds, minimizing the physical damage to its immediate surroundings. More selected pictures Image 10 M198 howitzerPhoto credit: L Cpl. Samantha L. Jones, USMC Nine Marines from Mike Battery, 4th Battalion, 14th Marines operate the 155mm M198 howitzer in November 2004. The battery was based at Camp Fallujah, Iraq and was supporting Operation Phantom Fury. All nine members of the M198 crew are present. More selected pictures Image 11 Continuous castingPhoto: Alchemist-hp A disc of copper made by continuous casting, the process whereby molten metal is solidified into a "semifinished" state for subsequent rolling in the finishing mills. Continuous casting replaced the creation of ingots using stationary moulds. The process allows lower-cost production of metal sections with better quality, due to the inherently lower costs of continuous, standardised production of a product, as well as providing increased control over the process through automation. After casting, this disc was then etched to achieve its final state. More selected pictures Image 12 Sukhoi Su-30Photo: Sergey Krivchikov The Sukhoi Su-30 is a twin-engine, two-seat supermanoeuverable fighter aircraft developed by Russia's Sukhoi Aviation Corporation. It is a multirole fighter for all-weather, air-to-air and air-to-surface deep interdiction missions. Its primary users are Russia, India, China, Venezuela, and Malaysia. More selected pictures Image 13 Thermoplastic-sheathed cablePhotograph credit: Petar Miloševi? A thermoplastic-sheathed cable consists of a toughened outer thermoplastic sheath of polyvinyl chloride, covering one or more individual annealed copper conductors. Each of the current-carrying conductors in the "core" is insulated by an individual thermoplastic sheath, coloured to indicate the purpose of the conductor concerned. The protective earth conductor may also be covered with insulation, although, in some countries, this conductor may be left as bare copper. The type of thermoplastic, the dimensions of the conductors and the colour of their individual insulation are specified by the regulatory bodies in the various countries concerned. More selected pictures Image 14 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 15 Semi-submersiblePhoto: Agência Brasil The semi-submersible oil platform P-51, operated by Brazilian energy company Petrobras, being positioned by tugboats. Semisubs sit on pontoons located under the ocean surface, with the operating deck atop columns, above the sea level. In this manner, they are relatively protected from wave action. More selected pictures Image 16 Trojan Room coffee potPicture: Quentin Stafford-Fraser The Trojan Room coffee pot was the inspiration for the world's first webcam. The coffee pot was located in the corridor just outside the so-called Trojan Room within the old Computer Laboratory of the University of Cambridge. The webcam was created in 1991 to help people working in other parts of the building avoid pointless trips to the coffee pot by providing, on the user's desktop computer, a live 128×128 pixel greyscale picture of the state of the coffee pot. The webcam was shut down on 22 August 2001, following the Computer Laboratory's move to the William Gates Building. More selected pictures Image 17 Burj KhalifaPhotograph: Donald Y Tong Burj Khalifa is a skyscraper in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, and currently the tallest man-made structure in the world, at 829.8 m (2,722 ft). It was designed to be the centerpiece of a large-scale, mixed-use development known as Downtown Dubai. Construction took over five years, and the skyscraper was officially opened in January 2010. More selected pictures Image 18 Aerospike enginePhoto credit: Marshall Space Flight Center A test firing of twin linear XRS-2200 aerospike engines, originally built for the Lockheed Martin X-33, a next-generation, commercially operated reusable launch vehicle. The aerospike engine is a type of rocket engine that maintains its efficiency across a wide range of altitudes through the use of an aerospike nozzle. A vehicle with an aerospike engine uses 25-30% less fuel at low altitudes, where most missions have the greatest need for thrust. More selected pictures Image 19 Filling stationPhotograph: Uwe Aranas A filling station in Sabah, Malaysia, operated by Royal Dutch Shell. Filling stations, also known under a wide variety of names, are facilities that sell fuel and engine lubricants for motor vehicles. They include one or more fuel dispensers, which distribute fuels such as gasoline and diesel into the tanks within vehicles and calculate the financial cost of the fuel transferred. Filling stations may also include air compressors and electricity sockets, which may inflate tyres or offer charging stations. Many filling stations also incorporate a convenience store, where customers can purchase snacks and other goods. More selected pictures Image 20 Wiesen ViaductPhotograph: David Gubler The Wiesen Viaduct is a single-track railway viaduct (concrete blocks with dimension stone coverage) which spans the Landwasser southwest of the hamlet of Wiesen, Switzerland. Designed by Henning Friedrich, then the chief engineer of the Rhaetian Railway, it was built between 1906 and 1909 by the contractor G. Marasi (Westermann & Cie, Zürich) under the supervision of P. Salaz and Hans Studer (RhB). The Rhaetian Railway still owns and uses the viaduct today for regular service with 29 passenger trains per day. An important element of the Davos–Filisur railway, the viaduct is 88.9 metres (292 ft) high, 210 metres (690 ft) long, and has a main span of 55 metres (180 ft). In 1926, the viaduct was the inspiration for Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's painting Brücke bei Wiesen. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that minimalist city-building game Islanders deliberately omits features such as resource accumulation and technology research in order to focus on the core mechanic of building placement? ... that when Chorus Systèmes SA was founded in 1986, French technology start-up companies were rare? ... that Turkey's Anadolu Shipyard signed a contract with India's Hindustan Shipyard to transfer technology for the building of five fleet support ships for the Indian Navy? ... that while raising two young children, Li Minhua became the first woman to earn a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at MIT? ... that Alejandro Finocchiaro, Argentina's current Minister of Education, Culture, Science and Technology, produced the 2008 documentary Mujeres de la Shoá ('Women of the Holocaust')? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. A centibillionaire, Musk is the richest person in the world as of November 2021. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 Schematic representation of the Dirac delta function by a line surmounted by an arrow. The height of the arrow is usually meant to specify the value of any multiplicative constant, which will give the area under the function. The other convention is to write the area next to the arrowhead. In mathematics, the Dirac delta function (? function), also known as the unit impulse symbol, is a generalized function or distribution over the real numbers, whose value is zero everywhere except at zero, and whose integral over the entire real line is equal to one. It can also be interpreted as a linear functional that maps every function to its value at zero, or as the weak limit of a sequence of bump functions, which are zero over most of the real line, with a tall spike at the origin. Bump functions are thus sometimes called "approximate" or "nascent" delta functions. The delta function was introduced by physicist Paul Dirac as a tool for the normalization of state vectors. It also has uses in probability theory and signal processing. As it is (or rather, was) not a true mathematical function, some mathematicians[who?] objected to it as nonsense until Laurent Schwartz developed the theory of distributions. Here he did find a true mathematical function, but on the level of the space of Schwartz functions or, in particular, of tempered distributions, to the real line. (Full article...) Image 2 The Sinclair Sovereign was a high-end calculator introduced by Clive Sinclair's company Sinclair Radionics in 1976. It was an attempt to escape from the unprofitable low end of the market, and one of the last calculators Sinclair produced. Made with a case of pressed steel that a variety of finishes, it cost between GB£30 and GB£60 at a time when other calculators could be purchased for under GB£5. A number of factors meant that the Sovereign was not a commercial success, including the cost, high import levies on components, competition from cheaper calculators manufactured abroad, and the development of more power-efficient designs using liquid-crystal displays. Though it came with a five-year guarantee, issues such as short battery life limited its usefulness. The company moved on to producing computers soon afterwards. The design by John Pemberton won a Design Council award, and there are examples of the Sovereign in the Museum of Modern Art in New York. It had a Mostek MK50321N main integrated circuit and a small memory register, a LED display, and could perform a variety of a number of basic mathematical operations besides four-function arithmetic. (Full article...) Image 3 State Route 67 (SR 67) is a 43.4 mi (69.8 km) long, north–south state highway in northern Arizona. Also called the Kaibab Plateau – North Rim Parkway, SR 67 is the sole road that links U.S. Route 89A (US 89A) at Jacob Lake to the North Rim of Grand Canyon National Park. Along the route, the road heads through the national park as well as Kaibab National Forest and traverses extensive coniferous forests. The section inside the national park is maintained by the National Park Service (NPS), whereas the section north of the entrance, completely within Kaibab National Forest, is owned by the Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT). The road was built in the late 1920s and improved through the 1930s. In 1941, the road received its number, and was given its designation as the parkway in the 1980s. The parkway has received designations as a National Forest Scenic Byway as well as a National Scenic Byway. (Full article...) Image 4 Interstate 680 (I-680) is a north–south auxiliary Interstate Highway in Northern California. It curves around the eastern cities of the San Francisco Bay Area from San Jose to Interstate 80 at Fairfield, bypassing cities along the eastern shore of San Francisco Bay such as Oakland and Richmond while serving others more inland such as Pleasanton and Concord. Built in the 1920s and designated in 1955, I-680 begins at a junction with I-280 and US 101 (Bayshore Freeway), and heads northeast and north-northwest through the northeast part of San Jose. After passing State Route 237 (SR 237) in Milpitas and SR 262 in Fremont, I-680 abruptly turns northeast (where a connection to a SR 238 freeway was planned) and enters the hills and valleys of the California Coast Ranges. The highway crosses over Mission Pass, also known as the Sunol Grade, and descends into the Sunol Valley, where it meets SR 84 near Sunol. From Sunol, I-680 again heads north-northwesterly through valleys, including the San Ramon Valley, along the Calaveras Fault. Junctions along this portion include I-580 in Dublin and SR 24 in Walnut Creek. Beyond the latter interchange, a three-way directional junction with the SR 24 freeway west to Oakland, I-680 heads north into Pleasant Hill, where SR 242 splits and I-680 again heads northwesterly. After the junction with SR 4 in Martinez, the highway crosses the Carquinez Strait on the Benicia-Martinez Bridge, immediately meeting the east end of I-780 on the Benicia end. The remainder of I-680, from Benicia to I-80 at Fairfield, lies between a hilly area to the west representing the southwestern tip of the Vaca Mountains, and a marshy area (along the Suisun Bay and Cordelia Slough) to the east. (Full article...) Image 5 County Route 149 (CR 149) is a 8.69-mile (13.99 km) county route in northern Sullivan County, New York, in the United States. The route runs from an intersection with New York State Route 52 (NY 52) in the Callicoon community of Youngsville to an intersection with CR 178 in the Rockland community of Livingston Manor. CR 149 was originally designated as New York State Route 284 in 1930. (Full article...) Image 6 The first-generation iPad (/?a?pæd/ EYE-pad) is a tablet computer designed and marketed by Apple Inc. as the first device in the iPad lineup of tablet computers. The device features an Apple A4 SoC, a 9.7" touchscreen display, and, on certain variants, the capability of accessing cellular networks. Using the iOS operating system, the iPad can play music, send and receive email and browse the web. Other functions, which include the ability to play games and access references, GPS navigation software and social network services can be enabled by downloading apps. The device was announced and unveiled on January 27, 2010 by Steve Jobs at an Apple press event. On April 3, 2010, the Wi-Fi variant of the device was released in the USA, followed by the release of the "Wi-Fi + 3G" variant on April 30. On May 28, 2010, it was released in Australia, Canada, France, Japan, Italy, Germany, Spain, Switzerland and the UK. (Full article...) Image 7 The Puncheon Run Connector is an unnumbered four-lane freeway in Dover, Delaware. It is named after Puncheon Run, a stream it follows. It provides a connection between U.S. Route 13 (US 13) and the northbound direction of the Delaware Route 1 (DE 1) toll road, with an intermediate interchange at Bay Road. The road is part of the National Highway System and serves as part of a north–south route for traffic crossing the Delmarva Peninsula. Planning for the Puncheon Run Connector began in the 1980s and originally included a freeway upgrade for US 13 south to Woodside. The connector was scaled back to its current routing in 1992. The freeway was built between 1998 and 2000 at a cost of $25 million. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 Ruby Loftus Screwing a Breech RingPainting: Laura Knight Ruby Loftus Screwing a Breech Ring is a 1943 painting by the British painter Laura Knight depicting a young woman, Ruby Loftus (1921–2004), working at an industrial lathe as part of the British war effort in World War II. The painting was commissioned by the War Artists' Advisory Committee, and is now part of the Imperial War Museum's art collection. The painting brought instant fame to Loftus, and has been likened to the American figure of "Rosie the Riveter". More selected pictures Image 2 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 3 Semi-submersiblePhoto: Agência Brasil The semi-submersible oil platform P-51, operated by Brazilian energy company Petrobras, being positioned by tugboats. Semisubs sit on pontoons located under the ocean surface, with the operating deck atop columns, above the sea level. In this manner, they are relatively protected from wave action. More selected pictures Image 4 George Washington CarverPhoto: Arthur Rothstein; Restoration: Lise Broer A portrait of George Washington Carver, American scientist, botanist, educator and inventor, from 1942. Much of Carver's fame is based on his research into and promotion of alternative crops to cotton, such as peanuts and sweet potatoes. In addition to his work on agricultural extension education for purposes of advocacy of sustainable agriculture and appreciation of plants and nature, Carver's important accomplishments also included improvement of racial relations, mentoring children, poetry, painting, and religion. One of his most important roles was in undermining, through the fame of his achievements and many talents, the widespread stereotype of the time that the black race was intellectually inferior to the white race. More selected pictures Image 5 Continuous castingPhoto: Alchemist-hp A disc of copper made by continuous casting, the process whereby molten metal is solidified into a "semifinished" state for subsequent rolling in the finishing mills. Continuous casting replaced the creation of ingots using stationary moulds. The process allows lower-cost production of metal sections with better quality, due to the inherently lower costs of continuous, standardised production of a product, as well as providing increased control over the process through automation. After casting, this disc was then etched to achieve its final state. More selected pictures Image 6 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 7 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 8 MicrometerPhotograph: Lucasbosch A micrometer is a device incorporating a calibrated screw, widely used for precise measurement of components in mechanical engineering and machining. Micrometers are usually, but not always, in the form of calipers (opposing ends joined by a frame). The spindle is a very accurately machined screw and the object to be measured is placed between the spindle and the anvil. The spindle is moved by turning the ratchet knob or thimble until the object to be measured is lightly touched by both the spindle and the anvil. More selected pictures Image 9 Fuel injectionImage credit: WikipedianProlific An animated cut-away diagram of a typical fuel injector, which is used to spray controlled amounts of petrol (gasoline) into an internal combustion engine. A solenoid is activated when fuel is intended to be delivered to the engine, causing the plunger to become pulled toward the solenoid by magnetic force. This uncovers the valve opening, allowing fuel to flow into the atomiser and out the spray tip. The route of fuel is shown in orange; grey/blue indicates no fuel present. More selected pictures Image 10 Mazda RX-8Photo credit: Fir0002 The Mazda RX-8 sports car is a front mid-engine, rear-wheel drive four-seat coupé manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation. It is the successor to the RX-7 and, like its predecessors in the RX range, it is powered by a rotary engine. The RX-8 began North American sales in the 2004 model year. More selected pictures Image 11 Apple Bandai PippinPhotograph: Evan Amos The Apple Bandai Pippin is a multimedia technology console designed by Apple Computer based on the Apple Pippin platform, and produced by Bandai. Only 100,000 of the consoles were produced between its 1996 release and 1997 discontinuation. The Bandai Pippin was intended to create an inexpensive computer aimed mostly at playing CD-based multimedia software, especially games, but also functioning as a thin client. More selected pictures Image 12 Union Pacific 844Photo: Drew Jacksich; edit: Bruce1ee Union Pacific 844 at Painted Rocks, Nevada, on a run from Elko to Sparks, on September 15, 2009. Built in 1944, it was the last steam locomotive delivered to Union Pacific and is the only steam locomotive never retired by a North American Class I railroad. More selected pictures Image 13 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 14 Wiesen ViaductPhotograph: David Gubler The Wiesen Viaduct is a single-track railway viaduct (concrete blocks with dimension stone coverage) which spans the Landwasser southwest of the hamlet of Wiesen, Switzerland. Designed by Henning Friedrich, then the chief engineer of the Rhaetian Railway, it was built between 1906 and 1909 by the contractor G. Marasi (Westermann & Cie, Zürich) under the supervision of P. Salaz and Hans Studer (RhB). The Rhaetian Railway still owns and uses the viaduct today for regular service with 29 passenger trains per day. An important element of the Davos–Filisur railway, the viaduct is 88.9 metres (292 ft) high, 210 metres (690 ft) long, and has a main span of 55 metres (180 ft). In 1926, the viaduct was the inspiration for Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's painting Brücke bei Wiesen. More selected pictures Image 15 CaliperImage credit: Joaquim Alves Gaspar An animation showing how to use a vernier caliper, which is a caliper that uses a vernier scale to interpolate linear measurements. Vernier calipers can measure internal and external dimensions using, respectively, the uppermost and lower jaws, and also depths, using the depth probe (located at the right end). In this example, the first two digits (2.4) are decided by the location of the zero of the vernier scale in the centimeter scale, and the last digit (0.07), by the first line of the vernier scale that exactly matches a line of the centimeter scale above. More selected pictures Image 16 RiggerPhoto credit: Alfred T. Palmer "Big Pete" Ramagos, rigger at work on Douglas Dam, Tennessee, June 1942. A rigger is a person or company which specializes in the lifting and/or moving of extremely large and/or heavy objects. Riggers use equipment expressly designed for moving and lifting objects where ordinary material handling equipment cannot go. More selected pictures Image 17 Kitty JoynerPhotograph: NACA Kitty Joyner (1916–1993) was an American electrical engineer with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), and then the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). She was hired in 1939 as the organization's first woman engineer, shortly after she had become the first woman to graduate from the University of Virginia's engineering program. More selected pictures Image 18 John HerschelPhotograph: Julia Margaret Cameron; restoration: Adam Cuerden John Herschel was an English mathematician, astronomer, chemist, inventor, and experimental photographer. He named seven moons of Saturn and four moons of Uranus, invented the cyanotype and actinometer, and wrote extensively on topics including meteorology, physical geography and the telescope. More selected pictures Image 19 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 20 Jet engineDiagram: Jeff Dahl A diagram of a typical turbojet engine. Air is compressed as it enters the engine, and is mixed with fuel that burns in the combustion section. Released through the exhaust, the resulting hot gases provide forward thrust and turn the turbines that drive the fan blades of the compressor. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that while raising two young children, Li Minhua became the first woman to earn a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at MIT? ... that Turkey's Anadolu Shipyard signed a contract with India's Hindustan Shipyard to transfer technology for the building of five fleet support ships for the Indian Navy? ... that minimalist city-building game Islanders deliberately omits features such as resource accumulation and technology research in order to focus on the core mechanic of building placement? ... that XTC's Oranges & Lemons, released 30 years ago today, reinterpreted 1960s psychedelic music styles using 1980s instrumentation and technology? ... that while Caltech's historic South Houses were renovated, its North Houses were recommended for demolition for lack of architectural appeal? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. A centibillionaire, Musk is the richest person in the world as of November 2021. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Portal:Technology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Technology Portal Shortcut P:TECH Technology ("science of craft", from Greek ?????, techne, "art, skill, cunning of hand"; and -?????, -logia) is the sum of any techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in the production of goods or services or in the accomplishment of objectives, such as scientific investigation. Technology can be the knowledge of techniques, processes, and the like, or it can be embedded in machines to allow for operation without detailed knowledge of their workings. Systems (e.g. machines) applying technology by taking an input, changing it according to the system's use, and then producing an outcome are referred to as technology systems or technological systems. The simplest form of technology is the development and use of basic tools. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools followed by the discovery of how to control fire increased sources of food. The later Neolithic Revolution extended this, and quadrupled the sustenance available from a territory. The invention of the wheel helped humans to travel in and control their environment. (Full article...) Outline of technology · Indexes Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 129 loading coal c.?1895 129 (also known as Barge 129, or No.129) was an American whaleback barge in service between 1893 and 1902. Built between December 1892 and May 1893, in Superior, Wisconsin, (or West Superior, Wisconsin), by Alexander McDougall's American Steel Barge Company, for McDougall's fleet of the same name, based in Buffalo, New York. She was one of a class of distinctive and experimental class of ships designed and built by McDougall. The whalebacks were designed to be more stable in high seas. They had rounded decks, and lacked the normal straight sides seen on traditional lake freighters. 129 entered service on May 22, hauling wheat from Superior. She was sold to the Bessemer Steamship Company of Cleveland, Ohio, in 1900. In 1901, she became owned by the Pittsburgh Steamship Company of Duluth, Minnesota, when the Bessemer fleet merged into it. On October 13, 1902, 129 was downbound, loaded with iron ore, in tow of the bulk freighter Maunaloa. The two vessels encountered rough seas while about 30 miles (48.3 km) northwest of Vermilion Point. 129 broke away, Maunaloa turned around, and attempted to retrieve 129. However, the heavy seas pushed Maunaloa against 129; her port anchor sliced into 129's starboard side. 129 took on water and sank fast. All of her crew were rescued by Maunaloa. (Full article...) Image 2 Whitcomb L. Judson (March 7, 1843 – December 7, 1909) was an American machine salesman, mechanical engineer and inventor. He received thirty patents over a sixteen-year career, fourteen of which were on pneumatic street railway innovations. Six of his patents had to do with a motor mechanism suspended beneath the rail-car that functioned with compressed air. He founded the Judson Pneumatic Street Railway. Judson is most noted for his invention of the common zipper. It was originally called a clasp-locker. The first application was as a fastener for shoes and high boots. The patent said it could be used wherever it was desirable to connect a pair of adjacent flexible parts that could be detached easily. Possible applications noted were for corsets, gloves, and mail bags. (Full article...) Image 3 State Route 209 (SR 209) was a state highway in the U.S. state of California, connecting Cabrillo National Monument with the interchange of Interstate 5 (I-5) and I-8 in San Diego, passing through the neighborhoods of Point Loma. The majority of the route was along Rosecrans Street; it also included Cañon Street and Catalina Boulevard leading to the tip of Point Loma. The Rosecrans Street portion of SR 209 corresponded to the original routing of the historic La Playa Trail. Rosecrans Street was paved in the late 19th century through the community of Roseville, and was added to the state highway system in 1933 as Route 12. SR 209 was designated in the 1964 state highway renumbering, and a full interchange with I-5 and I-8 was completed in 1969. The designation was removed from the state highway system in 2003 and responsibility for the road was transferred to the city of San Diego. (Full article...) Image 4 HTC One (codenamed and retroactively called M7) is a touchscreen-based Android smartphone designed, developed, and manufactured by HTC. The smartphone was unveiled on 19 February 2013 at press events in New York City and London and is HTC's seventh flagship smartphone. It is the successor to the company's 2012 flagship model, the One X—which was critically acclaimed, but commercially unsuccessful due in part to insufficient marketing efforts. To make the device stand out among its competition, HTC One was developed with a major emphasis on unique hardware and software features; which included a unibody aluminum frame, a 1080p full-HD display, dual front-facing stereo speakers, a camera with a custom image sensor and the ability to automatically generate montages of media, an updated version of HTC's Sense user experience, BlinkFeed—an aggregator of news and social network content, and an electronic program guide app with the ability to serve as a universal remote via an IR blaster located in the device's power button. Beginning in March 2013, HTC One was made available to mobile operators and major retailers in at least 181 countries. Manufacturing delays led to a staggered release beginning in late March, with its release date in certain markets (such as Asia and North America) pushed to late-April. Nevertheless, with around 5 million units being sold during its first two months of worldwide availability, HTC stated that the One was the most successful launch in the company's history. (Full article...) Image 5 Interstate 287 (I-287) is an auxiliary Interstate Highway in the US states of New Jersey and New York. It is a partial beltway around New York City, serving the northern half of New Jersey and the counties of Rockland and Westchester in New York. I-287, which is signed north–south in New Jersey and east–west in New York, follows a roughly horseshoe-shaped route from the New Jersey Turnpike (I-95) in Edison Township, New Jersey, clockwise to the New England Thruway (I-95) in Rye, New York, for 98.72 miles (158.87 km). Through New Jersey, I-287 runs west from its southern terminus in Edison through suburban areas. In Bridgewater Township, the freeway takes a more northeasterly course, paralleled by U.S. Route 202 (US 202). The northernmost part of I-287 in New Jersey passes through mountainous surroundings. After crossing into New York at Suffern, I-287 turns east on the New York State Thruway (I-87) and runs through Rockland County. After crossing the Hudson River on the Tappan Zee Bridge, I-287 splits from I-87 near Tarrytown and continues east through Westchester County on the Cross-Westchester Expressway until it reaches the New England Thruway. Within New Jersey, I-287 is maintained by the New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT), and within New York, it is maintained by the New York State Thruway Authority (NYSTA). A bypass around New York City had been planned since the 1950s and would become a part of the Interstate Highway System and receive the I-287 designation. The Cross-Westchester Expressway, which was originally designated as Interstate 187, opened in 1960 as Interstate 487 before later becoming part of I-287. The New York State Thruway portion of I-287, which included a crossing of the Hudson River, opened in 1955. In New Jersey, the proposed I-287 had originally been designated as FAI Corridor 104 and incorporated what was planned as the Middlesex Freeway. The New Jersey section of I-287 between the New Jersey Turnpike in Edison and US 202 in Montville opened in stages between the 1960s and 1973; the remainder was completed by 1994. The aging Tappan Zee Bridge was replaced with a new span which opened in stages between 2017 and 2018. (Full article...) Image 6 State Route 27 (SR 27) is a 90-mile-long (145 km) state highway serving Whitman and Spokane counties, located in the eastern region of the U.S. state of Washington. The highway travels generally north from U.S. Route 195 (US 195) through Pullman, Palouse, Tekoa, and Spokane Valley to SR 290 north of an interchange with Interstate 90 (I-90). SR 27 serves the Palouse region as part of the Palouse Scenic Byway and travels between US 195 to the west and US 95 to the east in Idaho, with several auxiliary routes connecting to the two other highways. The highway has been part of the state highway system since 1913, as a part of the Second Division of the Eastern Route of the Inland Empire Highway between Pullman and Oakesdale that later became a branch of Primary State Highway 3 (PSH 3), as well as Secondary State Highway 3H (SSH 3H) in 1937. Both highways were combined to form SR 27 during the 1964 highway renumbering and the designation was extended south to the US 195 bypass of Pullman in 1975 and north to SR 290 in 1991. (Full article...) Image 7 M-146 was a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that initially served as a bypass for traffic going around Port Huron and as a short cut for traffic between U.S. Highway 25 (US 25) and M-21. Later it connected to the Blue Water Bridge before it was truncated to its final form. Segments of M-146 still exist today as state highways as part of Interstate 94 (I-94) and I-69 and the Lapeer Connector. (Full article...) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 TRS connectorImage credit: Søren Peo Pedersen Two TRS connectors (also known as jack plugs or phone plugs), a common audio connector. They are cylindrical in shape, with two or more contacts. Originally invented for use in telephone switchboards, jack plugs are still widely used, both in the original ¼-inch (6.3 mm) size and in miniaturized versions. The top plug in this image is for stereo connections, while the bottom is for mono. More selected pictures Image 2 Eiffel TowerPhoto: Benh Lieu Song The Eiffel Tower as seen from the Champ de Mars. At 324 metres (1,063 ft) tall, the tower, an iron lattice tower, is the tallest building in Paris, the most-visited paid monument in the world, as well as one of the most recognizable structures in the world. Named after its designer, Gustave Eiffel, it was built as an entrance arch for the 1889 Exposition Universelle and has since become the most prominent symbol of both Paris and France. More selected pictures Image 3 Overhead power lineCredit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles. More selected pictures Image 4 Wiesen ViaductPhotograph: David Gubler The Wiesen Viaduct is a single-track railway viaduct (concrete blocks with dimension stone coverage) which spans the Landwasser southwest of the hamlet of Wiesen, Switzerland. Designed by Henning Friedrich, then the chief engineer of the Rhaetian Railway, it was built between 1906 and 1909 by the contractor G. Marasi (Westermann & Cie, Zürich) under the supervision of P. Salaz and Hans Studer (RhB). The Rhaetian Railway still owns and uses the viaduct today for regular service with 29 passenger trains per day. An important element of the Davos–Filisur railway, the viaduct is 88.9 metres (292 ft) high, 210 metres (690 ft) long, and has a main span of 55 metres (180 ft). In 1926, the viaduct was the inspiration for Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's painting Brücke bei Wiesen. More selected pictures Image 5 MicrometerPhotograph: Lucasbosch A micrometer is a device incorporating a calibrated screw, widely used for precise measurement of components in mechanical engineering and machining. Micrometers are usually, but not always, in the form of calipers (opposing ends joined by a frame). The spindle is a very accurately machined screw and the object to be measured is placed between the spindle and the anvil. The spindle is moved by turning the ratchet knob or thimble until the object to be measured is lightly touched by both the spindle and the anvil. More selected pictures Image 6 Burj KhalifaPhotograph: Donald Y Tong Burj Khalifa is a skyscraper in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, and currently the tallest man-made structure in the world, at 829.8 m (2,722 ft). It was designed to be the centerpiece of a large-scale, mixed-use development known as Downtown Dubai. Construction took over five years, and the skyscraper was officially opened in January 2010. More selected pictures Image 7 TelephoneCredit: Berthold Werner A telephone, or phone, is a telecommunications device that converts sound, typically the human voice, into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. More selected pictures Image 8 RiggerPhoto credit: Alfred T. Palmer "Big Pete" Ramagos, rigger at work on Douglas Dam, Tennessee, June 1942. A rigger is a person or company which specializes in the lifting and/or moving of extremely large and/or heavy objects. Riggers use equipment expressly designed for moving and lifting objects where ordinary material handling equipment cannot go. More selected pictures Image 9 Four-stroke cyclePhoto credit: Eric Pierce The four-stroke cycle of an internal combustion engine is the cycle most commonly used for automotive and industrial purposes today, including cars, trucks, and generators. The cycle was invented by Nikolaus Otto in 1876, and is also called the Otto cycle. The cycle is characterized by four strokes, or straight movements in a single direction, of the piston. More selected pictures Image 10 Parabolic antennaPhoto credit: Richard Bartz A parabolic antenna, a high-gain reflector antenna used for radio, television and data communications, at Erdfunkstelle Raisting, the largest facility for satellite communication in the world, based in Raisting, Bavaria, Germany. Parabolic antennas work by reflecting electromagnetic radiation off the paraboloid dish to or from the feed horn (center), for reception or transmission respectively. More selected pictures Image 11 WindmillPhoto credit: Michael Reeve Pitstone Windmill, believed to be the oldest windmill in the British Isles A windmill is an engine powered by wind energy. In Europe, windmills have been used since the Middle Ages. They were developed from the 12th century, apparently from technology gained by crusaders who came into contact with windmills in the Middle East. Persian sources indicate windmill use as early as the 7th century BC. In the United States, the development of water-pumping windmills was a major factor in allowing the farming of vast areas of North America. More selected pictures Image 12 Thermoplastic-sheathed cablePhotograph credit: Petar Miloševi? A thermoplastic-sheathed cable consists of a toughened outer thermoplastic sheath of polyvinyl chloride, covering one or more individual annealed copper conductors. Each of the current-carrying conductors in the "core" is insulated by an individual thermoplastic sheath, coloured to indicate the purpose of the conductor concerned. The protective earth conductor may also be covered with insulation, although, in some countries, this conductor may be left as bare copper. The type of thermoplastic, the dimensions of the conductors and the colour of their individual insulation are specified by the regulatory bodies in the various countries concerned. More selected pictures Image 13 Trojan Room coffee potPicture: Quentin Stafford-Fraser The Trojan Room coffee pot was the inspiration for the world's first webcam. The coffee pot was located in the corridor just outside the so-called Trojan Room within the old Computer Laboratory of the University of Cambridge. The webcam was created in 1991 to help people working in other parts of the building avoid pointless trips to the coffee pot by providing, on the user's desktop computer, a live 128×128 pixel greyscale picture of the state of the coffee pot. The webcam was shut down on 22 August 2001, following the Computer Laboratory's move to the William Gates Building. More selected pictures Image 14 EscalatorCredit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor-driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. More selected pictures Image 15 Laptop computerCredit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. More selected pictures Image 16 Steam turbinePhoto credit: Christian Kuhna The rotor of a modern steam turbine , which converts steam (heat) energy into kinetic (mechanical) energy. The steam path is from the smallest blade, expanding through progressively larger blade elements. Steam turbines are used in power plants to extract mechanical work from pressurized steam and benefit from their high efficiency and high power-to-weight ratio compared to other technologies, leading to their widespread deployment from electricity generation to marine propulsion. More selected pictures Image 17 M198 howitzerPhoto credit: L Cpl. Samantha L. Jones, USMC Nine Marines from Mike Battery, 4th Battalion, 14th Marines operate the 155mm M198 howitzer in November 2004. The battery was based at Camp Fallujah, Iraq and was supporting Operation Phantom Fury. All nine members of the M198 crew are present. More selected pictures Image 18 WheelCredit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing. The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. More selected pictures Image 19 Empire State BuildingImage credit: Lewis Hine A structural worker bolts beams on the framework during the construction of the Empire State Building in New York City. The 1,250-foot (380 m) building opened on May 1, 1931, at the time the tallest building in the world, overtaking the Chrysler Building (seen to the right), which had just been completed the year before. The addition of a pinnacle and antennas later increased its overall height to 1,472 feet (449 m). More selected pictures Image 20 Australia Telescope Compact ArrayPhotograph credit: John Masterson, CSIRO; restored by Bammesk The Australia Telescope Compact Array is a radio telescope operated by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) at the Paul Wild Observatory, 25 km (16 mi) west of the town of Narrabri in New South Wales, Australia. The telescope is an array of six identical dishes each 22 metres (72 ft) in diameter, which commonly operate in aperture synthesis mode to produce images from radio waves. Five of the dishes can be moved along a 3-kilometre (2 mi) railway track; the sixth is situated three kilometres west of the end of the main track. Each dish weighs about 270 tonnes (270 long tons; 300 short tons). This photograph, showing five of the Australia Telescope Compact Array's dishes, was taken around 1984, in the late phase of the construction process. It is a long-exposure photograph taken in darkness in the late evening; during the exposure, the photographer, John Masterson, walked around the dishes firing off over 130 flashes using a hand-held flash gun. More selected pictures Did you know - show different entries ... that Karlin Lillington, long-time technology writer for Ireland's newspaper of record, The Irish Times, holds a PhD on the poetry of Seamus Heaney? ... that Andrew Niikondo, acting vice-chancellor of the Namibia University of Science and Technology, completed his secondary school education only at age 30? ... that the melt-blowing technology used to create N95 respirators was previously used to produce ready-made ribbon bows and bra cups? ... that Alejandro Finocchiaro, Argentina's current Minister of Education, Culture, Science and Technology, produced the 2008 documentary Mujeres de la Shoá ('Women of the Holocaust')? ... that Turkey's Anadolu Shipyard signed a contract with India's Hindustan Shipyard to transfer technology for the building of five fleet support ships for the Indian Navy? ... that Theresa M. Korn turned down a scholarship to the Carnegie Institute of Technology in order to become the institute's first female engineer? Top 10 WikiProject Technology Popular articles of the month Image 1 Logo since 2017 YouTube is an American online video sharing and social media platform owned by Google. It was launched on February 14, 2005 by Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim. It is the second most visited website, with more than one billion monthly users who collectively watch more than one billion hours of videos each day. , videos were being uploaded at a rate of more than 500 hours of content per minute. (Full article...) Image 2 Musk at the Royal Society admissions day in London, 2018 Elon Reeve Musk FRS (/?i?l?n/; born June 28, 1971) is an entrepreneur and business magnate. He is the founder, CEO, and Chief Engineer at SpaceX; early-stage investor, CEO, and Product Architect of Tesla, Inc.; founder of The Boring Company; and co-founder of Neuralink and OpenAI. A centibillionaire, Musk is the richest person in the world as of November 2021. (Full article...) Image 3 Logo Google LLC is an American multinational technology company that specializes in Internet-related services and products, which include online advertising technologies, a search engine, cloud computing, software, and hardware. It is considered one of the Big Five companies in the American information technology industry, along with Amazon, Apple, Meta (Facebook) and Microsoft. (Full article...) Image 4 Facebook is an American online social media and social networking service owned by Meta Platforms. Founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg with fellow Harvard College students and roommates Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, Dustin Moskovitz, and Chris Hughes, its name comes from the face book directories often given to American university students. Membership was initially limited to Harvard students, gradually expanding to other North American universities and, since 2006, anyone over 13 years old. As of 2020, Facebook claimed 2.8 billion monthly active users, and ranked seventh in global internet usage. It was the most downloaded mobile app of the 2010s. (Full article...) Image 5 Logo since 2000 Amazon.com, Inc. (/?æm?z?n/ AM-?-zon) is an American multinational technology company which focuses on e-commerce, cloud computing, digital streaming, and artificial intelligence. It is one of the Big Five companies in the U.S. information technology industry, along with Google (Alphabet), Apple, Meta (Facebook), and Microsoft. The company has been referred to as "one of the most influential economic and cultural forces in the world", as well as the world's most valuable brand. (Full article...) Image 6 WhatsApp Messenger, or simply WhatsApp, is an American freeware, cross-platform centralized instant messaging (IM) and voice-over-IP (VoIP) service owned by Meta Platforms. It allows users to send text messages and voice messages, make voice and video calls, and share images, documents, user locations, and other content. WhatsApp's client application runs on mobile devices but is also accessible from desktop computers, as long as the user's mobile device remains connected to the Internet while they use the desktop app. The service requires a cellular mobile telephone number to sign up. In January 2018, WhatsApp released a standalone business app targeted at small business owners, called WhatsApp Business, to allow companies to communicate with customers who use the standard WhatsApp client. (Full article...) Image 7 YouTube Premium (formerly YouTube Red) is a subscription service offered by the video platform YouTube. The service provides ad-free access to content across the service, as well as access to premium YouTube Originals programming produced in collaboration with the site's creators, downloading videos and background playback of videos on mobile devices, and access to the YouTube Music music streaming service. (Full article...) Image 8 Commercial logo as used by Apple, since 2017 iOS (formerly iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its hardware. It is the operating system that powers many of the company's mobile devices, including the iPhone and iPod Touch; the term also included the versions running on iPads until the name iPadOS was introduced with version 13 in 2019. It is the world's second-most widely installed mobile operating system, after Android. It is the basis for three other operating systems made by Apple: iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is proprietary software, although some parts of it are open source under the Apple Public Source License and other licenses. (Full article...) Image 9 macOS (/?mæko???s/; previously Mac OS X and later OS X) is a proprietary graphical operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001. It is the primary operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Windows NT and ahead of Chrome OS. (Full article...) Image 10 A tweet sent from the International Space Station account, including a photograph, a link and two hashtags Twitter (initially called Twttr) is an American microblogging and social networking service on which users post and interact with messages known as "tweets". Registered users can post, like, and retweet tweets, but unregistered users can only read those that are publicly available. Users interact with Twitter through browser or mobile frontend software, or programmatically via its APIs. Prior to April 2020, services were accessible via SMS. The service is provided by Twitter, Inc., a corporation based in San Francisco, California, and has more than 25 offices around the world. Tweets were originally restricted to 140 characters, but the limit was doubled to 280 for non-CJK languages in November 2017. Audio and video tweets remain limited to 140 seconds for most accounts. (Full article...) WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking What are WikiProjects? Categories Select [?] to view subcategories Technology Technology by type Outlines of technology and applied science Technology-related lists Works about technology Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Artificial objects Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technology development Engineering Technology evangelism High-technology business districts History of technology Hypothetical technology Manufacturing Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Regulation of technologies Science and technology Software Technology strategy Technology systems Technical specifications Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear power Nuclear weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterial Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Commons Outline Portal WikiProject News See also: 2021 in science and technology October 28, 2021 – Australia–France relations French President Emmanuel Macron tells Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison that Morrison had broken the trust between the two countries and that it was up to Canberra to repair those ties with "tangible actions". France had criticized its allies after Australia opted for nuclear-powered submarines to be built with U.S. and British technology instead of a $A90 billion French diesel-electric submarine program. Macron also urged Australia to stop mining coal. (The Canberra Times) October 25, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Philippines Health Technology Assessment Council approves the administration of a third COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose to health workers in the fourth quarter of 2021, with other priority groups becoming eligible for a booster dose in 2022. (Rappler) October 18, 2021 – Egor Babaev and collaborators with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology publish an experiment showing evidence of a new state of matter called electron quadruplets. (Phys.org) September 27, 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic The Health Ministry panel committee approve the usage of the single-dose monoclonal antibody-based treatment sotrovimab developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology to treat mild and moderately-ill COVID-19 patients. (The Japan Times) September 19, 2021 – 2021 Australian Parliament House sexual misconduct allegations Australian Industry, Science and Technology Minister Christian Porter resigns amid criticism for receiving anonymous donations in his defamation case against the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who reported on historical rape allegations against him. (The Guardian) September 17, 2021 – AUKUS The Australian Defence Minister announces that the new strategic partnership will also include increased numbers of U.S. bombers and airplanes being based out of Australia. In addition, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace notes that the deal has revealed a loophole in nuclear policy that does not bar states without nuclear weapons from obtaining nuclear technology for submarines and that this falls outside of IAEA inspections. (ABC News Australia) (Foreign Policy) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games War Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests: Computer science, computing, and Internet topics · Engineering topics · Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions: Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand: check Electronics · Engineer · Optics · Robotics · Telecommunications · Wireless Notability: Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures: Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wikivoyage  Travel guides Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Sub-pages of Portal:Technology Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1054077716" Categories: All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using Template:Post-nominals with missing parameters Portals with short description Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Past featured portals Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Portal Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Languages Alemannisch ???? ??????? ???? ?????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Català Cebuano ??????? Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto ????? Français Frysk G?k?y? ??? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu ????? ??????? ??????? Kurdî ???????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Magyar ?????????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??? ??????? Occitan ????? O?zbekcha/??????? ???? Polski Português Român? ??????? Seeltersk Shqip ????? ????? Suomi Svenska ????? Tacl?it ???????/tatarça ????????? Türkçe ?? ???? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t Wolof ?? Zazaki ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 7 November 2021, at 22:57 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement