https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pungency Pungency - Wikipedia Pungency From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Sharp smell or flavor "Spicy" redirects here. For other uses, see Spicy (disambiguation). A display of hot peppers and the Scoville scale at a supermarket in Houston, Texas Pungency is the condition of having a strong, sharp smell or flavor.[1][2] It refers to the characteristic of food commonly referred to as spiciness, hotness or heat,[3][4][5] found in foods such as chili peppers. Highly pungent tastes may be experienced as unpleasant. The term piquancy (/?pi?k?nsi/) is sometimes applied to foods with a lower degree of pungency[2] that are "agreeably stimulating to the palate". Examples of piquant food include mustard and curry. Contents 1 Terminology 2 Applications 2.1 In foods 3 Mechanism 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Terminology[edit] The terms "pungent" (/?p?nd??nt/ (listen)) and "pungency" are rarely used in colloquial speech but are preferred by scientists as they eliminate the potential ambiguity arising from use of the words "hot" and "spicy", which can also refer to temperature and the presence of spices, respectively.[3][4][6] For instance, a pumpkin pie can be both hot (out of the oven) and spicy (due to the common inclusion of spices such as cinnamon, nutmeg, allspice, mace, and cloves), but it is not pungent. (A food critic may nevertheless use the word piquant to describe such a pie, especially if it is exceptionally well-seasoned.) Conversely, pure capsaicin is pungent, yet it is not naturally accompanied by a hot temperature or spices. As the Oxford, Collins, and Merriam-Webster dictionaries explain, "piquancy" can refer to mild pungency,[2] that is, flavors and spices that are much less strong than chilli peppers, including, for example, the strong flavor of some tomatoes. In other words, pungency always refers to a very strong taste whereas piquancy refers to any spices and foods that are "agreeably stimulating to the palate", in other words to food that is spicy in the general sense of "well-spiced". Applications[edit] Pungent substances have been used as analgesics and for flavoring foods.[7] In foods[edit] A display of spices in Guadeloupe: some pungent, some not Pungency is often quantified in scales that range from mild to hot. The Scoville scale measures the pungency of chili peppers, as defined by the amount of capsaicin they contain. Pungency is not considered a taste in the technical sense because it is carried to the brain by a different set of nerves. While taste nerves are activated when consuming foods like chili peppers, the sensation commonly interpreted as "hot" results from the stimulation of somatosensory fibers in the mouth. Many parts of the body with exposed membranes that lack taste receptors (such as the nasal cavity, genitals, or a wound) produce a similar sensation of heat when exposed to pungent agents. The pungent sensation provided by chili peppers, black pepper and other spices like ginger and horseradish plays an important role in a diverse range of cuisines across the world, such as Korean, Persian, Turkish, Tunisian, Ethiopian, Hungarian, Spanish, Indian, Burmese, Filipino (particularly Bicolano), Indonesian, Lao, Singaporean, Malaysian, Bangladeshi, Mexican, Peruvian, Caribbean, Pakistani, Somali, Southwest Chinese (including Sichuan cuisine), Sri Lankan, Vietnamese, and Thai cuisines.[citation needed] Mechanism[edit] Pungency is sensed via chemesthesis, the sensitivity of the skin and mucous membranes to chemical substances. Substances such as piperine and capsaicin can cause a burning sensation by inducing a trigeminal nerve stimulation together with normal taste reception. The pungent feeling caused by allyl isothiocyanate, capsaicin, piperine, and allicin is caused by activation of the heat thermo- and chemosensitive TRP ion channels including TRPV1 and TRPA1 nociceptors. The pungency of chilies may be an adaptive response to microbial pathogens.[3] See also[edit] Food portal Pyruvate scale Scoville scale Thermoception References[edit] ^ "Pungency". Collins English Dictionary. February 3, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2014. ^ a b c "Merriam-Webster Dictionary: "Pungent"". Merriam-webster.com. Retrieved February 7, 2014. ^ a b c Tewksbury, J. J.; Reagan, K. M.; Machnicki, N. J.; Carlo, T. A.; Haak, D. C.; Penaloza, A. L. C.; Levey, D. J. (2008). "Evolutionary ecology of pungency in wild chilies". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 105 (33): 11808–11811. Bibcode:2008PNAS..10511808T. doi:10.1073/pnas.0802691105. PMC 2575311. PMID 18695236. ^ a b "Chile Terminology" (PDF). Chile Pepper Institute, New Mexico State University. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 16, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. ^ "Chile Heat" (PDF). Chile Pepper Institute, New Mexico State University. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 16, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. ^ Haak, D. C.; McGinnis, L. A.; Levey, D. J.; Tewksbury, J. J. (2011). "Why are not all chilies hot? A trade-off limits pungency". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 279 (1735): 2012–2017. doi:10.1098/rspb.2011.2091. PMC 3311884. PMID 22189403. ^ Anand, P.; Bley, K. (October 2011). "Topical capsaicin for pain management: therapeutic potential and mechanisms of action of the new high-concentration capsaicin 8% patch". BJA: British Journal of Anaesthesia. 107 (4): 490–502. doi:10.1093/bja/aer260. ISSN 0007-0912. PMC 3169333. PMID 21852280. External links[edit] Look up pungency, pungent, or piquant in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. v t e Taste Basic tastes Bitterness Saltiness Sourness Sweetness Umami Anatomy Epiglottis Pharynx Soft palate Tongue Gustology Ageusia Dysgeusia Hypogeusia Hypergeusia Other Aftertaste Acquired taste Pungency Scoville scale Supertaster Tongue map See also Sight Hearing Smell Touch Authority control National libraries United States Other Microsoft Academic Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pungency&oldid=1044457736" Categories: Gustation Pain Characteristics of cheese Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hAudio microformats Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013 Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with MA identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Bân-lâm-gú Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français ??? Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ????? Jawa ????? ????? Bahasa Melayu ??? Runa Simi ??????? Sakizaya ????????? ????? ?????? ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 15 September 2021, at 09:42 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement