https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sandpiper Sandpiper - Wikipedia Sandpiper From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Family of birds This article is about the bird. For other uses, see Sandpiper (disambiguation). Sandpipers Temporal range: Early Oligocene to recent Dunlin (Calidris alpina) Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Aves Order: Charadriiformes Suborder: Scolopaci Family: Scolopacidae Rafinesque, 1815 Genera Bartramia Numenius Limosa Arenaria Prosobonia Calidris Limnodromus Scolopax Coenocorypha Lymnocryptes Gallinago Xenus Phalaropus Actitis Tringa Sandpipers are a large family, Scolopacidae, of waders. They include many species called sandpipers, as well as those called by names such as curlew and snipe. The majority of these species eat small invertebrates picked out of the mud or soil. Different lengths of bills enable different species to feed in the same habitat, particularly on the coast, without direct competition for food. Sandpipers have long bodies and legs, and narrow wings. Most species have a narrow bill, but otherwise the form and length are quite variable. They are small to medium-sized birds, measuring 12 to 66 cm (4.7–26.0 in) in length. The bills are sensitive, allowing the birds to feel the mud and sand as they probe for food. They generally have dull plumage, with cryptic brown, grey, or streaked patterns, although some display brighter colours during the breeding season.[1] Most species nest in open areas, and defend their territories with aerial displays. The nest itself is a simple scrape in the ground, in which the bird typically lays three or four eggs. The young of most species are precocial.[1] Sandpiper nest with four eggs Contents 1 Taxonomy 2 Evolution 3 Description 4 Distribution, habitat, and movements 5 Diet and feeding 6 Breeding 7 Gallery 8 Footnotes 9 References 10 External links Taxonomy[edit] The family Scolopacidae was introduced (as Scolopacea) by the French polymath Constantine Samuel Rafinesque in 1815.[2][3] The family contains 98 extant or recently extinct species divided into 15 genera.[4] For more details, see the article List of sandpiper species. Scolopacidae ? ? Bartramia – upland sandpiper ? ? Numenius – curlews (9 species) ? ? ? ? Limosa – godwits (4 species) ? ? ? ? Arenaria – turnstones (2 species) ? ? Calidris – sandpipers (24 species) ? ? ? ? ? Limnodromus – dowitchers (3 species) ? ? ? Scolopax – woodcocks (8 species) ? ? ? Coenocorypha – snipes (3 extant and 2 recently extinct species) ? ? Gallinago – snipes (18 species) ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Xenus – Terek sandpiper ? ? Phalaropus – phalaropes (3 species) ? ? ? ? Actitis – sandpipers (2 species) ? ? Tringa – sandpipers, tattlers etc (13 species) ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Phylogeny of the Scolopacidae based on a study by Rosemary Gibson and Allan Baker published in 2012. No specimens from the genera Prosobonia or Lymnocryptes were included. Though currently placed in Gallinago, the imperial snipe (Gallinago imperialis) was found to be more closely related to snipe in the genera Coenocorypha.[5] Evolution[edit] The early fossil record is very bad for a group that was probably present at the non-avian dinosaur's extinction. "Totanus" teruelensis (Late Miocene of Los Mansuetos (Spain) is sometimes considered a scolopacid – maybe a shank – but may well be a larid; little is known of it. Paractitis has been named from the Early Oligocene of Saskatchewan (Canada), while Mirolia is known from the Middle Miocene at Deiningen in the Nördlinger Ries (Germany). Most living genera would seem to have evolved throughout the Oligocene to Miocene with the waders perhaps a bit later; see the genus accounts for the fossil record. In addition there are some indeterminable remains that might belong to extant genera or their extinct relatives: Scolopacidae gen. et sp. indet. (Middle Miocene of Františkovy Lázn?, Czech Republic – Late Miocene of Kohfidisch, Austria) Scolopacidae gen. et sp. indet. (Edson Early Pliocene of Sherman County, USA)[note 1] Description[edit] The least sandpiper is the smallest species of sandpiper The sandpipers exhibit considerable range in size and appearance, the wide range of body forms reflecting a wide range of ecological niches. Sandpipers range in size from the least sandpiper, at as little as 18 grams (0.040 pounds) and 11 cm (4.3 in) in length, to the Far Eastern curlew, at up to 66 cm (26 in) in length, and the Eurasian curlew, at up to 1.3 kg (2.9 lb). Within species there is considerable variation in patterns of sexual dimorphism. Males are larger than females in ruffs and several sandpipers, but are smaller than females in the knots, curlews, phalaropes and godwits. The sexes are similarly sized in the snipes, woodcock and tringine sandpipers. Compared to the other large family of wading birds, the plovers (Charadriidae) they tend to have smaller eye, more slender heads, and longer thinner bills. Some are quite long-legged, and most species have three forward pointing toes with a smaller hind toe (the exception is the sanderling, which lacks a hind toe).[7] Sandpipers are more geared towards tactile foraging methods than the plovers, which favour more visual foraging methods, and this is reflected in the high density of tactile receptors in the tips of their bills. These receptors are housed in a slight horny swelling at the tip of the bill (except for the surfbird and the two turnstones). Bill shape is highly variable within the family, reflecting differences in feeding ecology. Bill length relative to head length varies from three times the length of the head in the long-billed curlew to just under half the head length in the Tuamotu sandpiper. Bills may be straight, slightly upcurled or strongly downcurved.[7] Like all birds, the bills of sandpipers are capable of cranial kinesis, literally being able to move the bones of the skull (other than the obvious movement of the lower jaw) and specifically bending the upper jaw without opening the entire jaw, an act known as rhynchokinesis. It has been hypothesized this helps when probing by allowing the bill to be partly opened with less force and improving manipulation of prey items in the substrate. Rhynchokinesis is also used by sandpipers feeding on prey in water to catch and manipulate prey.[8] Distribution, habitat, and movements[edit] Sandpipers spending the non-breeding season in Roebuck Bay, Western Australia The sandpipers have a cosmopolitan distribution, occurring across most of the world's land surfaces except for Antarctica and the driest deserts. A majority of the family breed at moderate to high latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere, in fact accounting for the most northerly breeding birds in the world. Only a few species breed in tropical regions, ten of which are snipes and woodcocks and the remaining species being the unusual Tuamotu sandpiper, which breeds in French Polynesia (although prior to the arrival of humans in the Pacific there were several other closely related species of Polynesian sandpiper).[7] Diet and feeding[edit] There are broadly four feeding styles employed by the sandpipers, although many species are flexible and may use more than one style. The first is pecking with occasional probing, usually done by species in drier habitats that do not have soft soils or mud. The second, and most frequent, method employed is probing soft soils, muds and sands for prey. The third, used by Tringa shanks, involves running in shallow water with the bill under the water chasing fish, a method that uses sight as well as tactile senses. The final method, employed by the phalaropes and some Calidris sandpipers, involves pecking at the water for small prey.[7] A few species of scolopacids are omnivorous to some extent, taking seeds and shoots as well as invertebrates. Breeding[edit] Many sandpipers form monogamous pairs, but some sandpipers have female-only parental care, some male-only parental care, some sequential polyandry and other compete for the mate on the lek. Sandpipers lay three or four eggs into the nest, which is usually a vague depression or scrape in the open ground, scarcely lined with soft vegetation.[7] In species where both parents incubate the eggs, females and males share their incubation duties in various ways both within and between species. In some pairs, parents exchange on the nest in the morning and in the evening so that their incubation rhythm follows a 24-hour day, in others each sex may sit on the nest continuously for up to 24 hours before it is exchanged by its partner.[9] In species where only a single parent incubates the eggs, during the night the parent sits on the eggs nearly continuously and then during the warmest part of a day leaves the nest for short feeding bouts.[10] Chicks hatch after about three weeks of incubation and are able to walk and forage within a few hours of hatching. A single parent or both parents guide and brood the chicks.[7] Gallery[edit] Bristle-thighed curlew (Numenius tahitiensis, right) and ruddy turnstones (Arenaria interpres) Common snipe (Gallinago gallinago) Greenshank (Tringa nebularia) Preening male ruff (Philomachus pugnax) Footnotes[edit] ^ A distal right tarsometatarsus of a bird roughly similar to a pectoral sandpiper. Probably calidrid or basal to them, somewhat reminiscent of turnstones.[6] References[edit] ^ a b Harrison, Colin J.O. (1991). Forshaw, Joseph (ed.). Encyclopaedia of Animals: Birds. London: Merehurst Press. pp. 103–105. ISBN 1-85391-186-0. ^ Rafinesque, Constantine Samuel (1815). Analyse de la nature ou, Tableau de l'univers et des corps organisés (in French). 1815. Palermo: Self-published. p. 70. ^ Bock, Walter J. (1994). History and Nomenclature of Avian Family-Group Names. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History. Number 222. New York: American Museum of Natural History. pp. 113, 252. hdl:2246/830. ^ Gill, Frank; Donsker, David; Rasmussen, Pamela, eds. (July 2021). "Sandpipers, snipes, coursers". IOC World Bird List Version 11.2. International Ornithologists' Union. Retrieved 18 November 2021. ^ Gibson, Rosemary; Baker, Allan (2012). "Multiple gene sequences resolve phylogenetic relationships in the shorebird suborder Scolopaci (Aves: Charadriiformes)". Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 64 (1): 66–72. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2012.03.008. ^ Wetmore, Alexander (1937). "The Eared Grebe and other Birds from the Pliocene of Kansas" (PDF). Condor. 39 (1): 40. doi:10.2307/1363487. JSTOR 1363487. ^ a b c d e f Piersma, Theunis (1996). "Family Scolopacidae (Snipes, Sandpipers and Phalaropes)". In del Hoyo, Josep; Elliott, Andrew; Sargatal, Jordi (eds.). Handbook of the Birds of the World. Volume 3, Hoatzin to Auks. Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. pp. 444–487. ISBN 978-84-87334-20-7. ^ Estrella, Sora; Masero, José A. (2007). "The use of distal rhynchokinesis by birds feeding in water". Journal of Experimental Biology. 210 (21): 3757–3762. doi:10.1242/jeb.007690. PMID 17951416. ^ Bulla, Martin; Valcu, Mihai; Dokter, Adriaan M.; Dondua, Alexei G.; Kosztolányi, András; Rutten, Anne L.; Helm, Barbara; Sandercock, Brett K.; Casler, Bruce (2016). "Unexpected diversity in socially synchronized rhythms of shorebirds" (PDF). Nature. 540 (7631): 109–113. Bibcode:2016Natur.540..109B. doi:10.1038/nature20563. PMID 27880762. S2CID 4390453. ^ Løfaldli, Lars (1985-01-01). "Incubation Rhythm in the Great Snipe Gallinago media". Holarctic Ecology. 8 (2): 107–112. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0587.1985.tb01160.x. JSTOR 3682650. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Scolopacidae. Sandpiper media on the Internet Bird Collection Cornell Lab of Ornithology sandpiper search results RedKnot.org links to shorebird recovery sites, movies, events & other information on red knot rufa and horseshoe crabs. v t e Sandpipers (family: Scolopacidae) Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Aves Order: Charadriiformes Scolopacidae (Numeniinae–Limosinae–Arenariinae) Numeniinae Bartramia Upland sandpiper (B. longicauda) Numenius (Curlews) Long-billed curlew (N. americanus) Eurasian curlew (N. arquata) Eskimo curlew (N. borealis) Hudsonian whimbrel (N. hudsonicus) Far Eastern curlew (N. madagascariensis) Little curlew (N. minutus) Eurasian whimbrel (N. phaeopus) Bristle-thighed curlew (N. tahitiensis) Slender-billed curlew (N. tenuirostris) Limosinae Limosa (Godwits) Marbled godwit (L. fedoa) Hudsonian godwit (L. haemastica) Bar-tailed godwit (L. lapponica) Black-tailed godwit (L. limosa) Arenariinae Arenaria (Turnstones) Ruddy turnstone (A. interpres) Black turnstone (A. melanocephala) Prosobonia Tuamotu sandpiper (P. parvirostris) Henderson sandpiper (P. sauli) Calidris Sharp-tailed sandpiper (C. acuminata) Sanderling (C. alba) Dunlin (C. alpina) Baird's sandpiper (C. bairdii) Red knot (C. canutus) Broad-billed sandpiper (C. falcinellus) Curlew sandpiper (C. ferruginea) White-rumped sandpiper (C. fuscicollis) Stilt sandpiper (C. himantopus) Purple sandpiper (C. maritima) Western sandpiper (C. mauri) Pectoral sandpiper (C. melanotos) Little stint (C. minuta) Least sandpiper (C. minutilla) Rock sandpiper (C. ptilocnemis) Ruff (C. pugnax) Semipalmated sandpiper (C. pusilla) Spoon-billed sandpiper (C. pygmaea) Red-necked stint (C. ruficollis) Long-toed stint (C. subminuta) Buff-breasted sandpiper (C. subruficollis) Temminck's stint (C. temminckii) Great knot (C. tenuirostris) Surfbird (C. virgata) Scolopacidae (Tringinae–Scolopacinae) Tringinae Xenus Terek sandpiper (X. cinereus) Phalaropus (Phalaropes) Red phalarope (P. fulicarius) Red-necked phalarope (P. lobatus) Wilson's phalarope (P. tricolor) Actitis Common sandpiper (A. hypoleucos) Spotted sandpiper (A. macularia) Tringa Grey-tailed tattler (T. brevipes) Spotted redshank (T. erythropus) Lesser yellowlegs (T. flavipes) Wood sandpiper (T. glareola) Nordmann's greenshank (T. guttifer) Wandering tattler (T. incana) Greater yellowlegs (T. melanoleuca) Common greenshank (T. nebularia) Green sandpiper (T. ochropus) Willet (T. semipalmata) Solitary sandpiper (T. solitaria) Marsh sandpiper (T. stagnatilis) Common redshank (T. totanus) Scolopacinae Lymnocryptes Jack snipe (L. minimus) Limnodromus (Dowitchers) Short-billed dowitcher (L. griseus) Long-billed dowitcher (L. scolopaceus) Asian dowitcher (L. semipalmatus) Scolopax (Woodcocks) Bukidnon woodcock (S. bukidnonensis) Sulawesi woodcock (S. celebensis) American woodcock (S. minor) Amami woodcock (S. mira) Moluccan woodcock (S. rochussenii) New Guinea woodcock (S. rosenbergii) Eurasian woodcock (S. rusticola) Javan woodcock (S. saturata) Coenocorypha Subantarctic snipe (C. aucklandica) Snares snipe (C. huegeli) Chatham snipe (C. pusilla) Gallinago (Snipes) Puna snipe (G. andina) Wilson's snipe (G. delicata) Common snipe (G. gallinago) Latham's snipe (G. hardwickii) Imperial snipe (G. imperialis) Jameson's snipe (G. jamesoni) Madagascar snipe (G. macrodactyla) Great snipe (G. media) Swinhoe's snipe (G. megala) Wood snipe (G. nemoricola) African snipe (G. nigripennis) Noble snipe (G. nobilis) South American snipe (G. paraguaiae) Solitary snipe (G. solitaria) Pin-tailed snipe (G. stenura) Fuegian snipe (G. stricklandii) Giant snipe (G. undulata) Based on Boyd (2019). Taxon identifiers Wikidata: Q26626 Wikispecies: Scolopacidae BOLD: 1431 EoL: 7988 EPPO: 1SCPCF Fauna Europaea: 10772 Fauna Europaea (new): 1f095266-519f-4c94-8aa3-c8194fcb8d75 Fossilworks: 39581 GBIF: 5282 iNaturalist: 3835 IRMNG: 101567 ITIS: 176568 NBN: NBNSYS0000160961 NCBI: 8917 NZOR: e4a00b79-83c4-47bb-bcd4-c4e0e9582989 WoRMS: 147429 Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) National libraries France (data) United States Japan Other Microsoft Academic Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sandpiper&oldid=1056039647" Categories: Sandpipers Extant Rupelian first appearances Taxa named by Constantine Samuel Rafinesque Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with GND identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with MA identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Languages ???????? Afrikaans Anarâškielâ ??????? Asturianu Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????????? ????????? Brezhoneg Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ??? ??????? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kotava Latina Latviešu Lietuvi? Livvinkarjala Magyar ?????? ???????? ?????????? Nederlands ??? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?????? ?????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Scots Simple English Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Suomi Svenska ????? ??? Lea faka-Tonga Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t West-Vlams Winaray ?? ?? Zeêuws ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 19 November 2021, at 10:19 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sandpiper Sandpiper - Wikipedia Sandpiper From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Family of birds This article is about the bird. For other uses, see Sandpiper (disambiguation). Sandpipers Temporal range: Early Oligocene to recent Dunlin (Calidris alpina) Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Aves Order: Charadriiformes Suborder: Scolopaci Family: Scolopacidae Rafinesque, 1815 Genera Bartramia Numenius Limosa Arenaria Prosobonia Calidris Limnodromus Scolopax Coenocorypha Lymnocryptes Gallinago Xenus Phalaropus Actitis Tringa Sandpipers are a large family, Scolopacidae, of waders. They include many species called sandpipers, as well as those called by names such as curlew and snipe. The majority of these species eat small invertebrates picked out of the mud or soil. Different lengths of bills enable different species to feed in the same habitat, particularly on the coast, without direct competition for food. Sandpipers have long bodies and legs, and narrow wings. Most species have a narrow bill, but otherwise the form and length are quite variable. They are small to medium-sized birds, measuring 12 to 66 cm (4.7–26.0 in) in length. The bills are sensitive, allowing the birds to feel the mud and sand as they probe for food. They generally have dull plumage, with cryptic brown, grey, or streaked patterns, although some display brighter colours during the breeding season.[1] Most species nest in open areas, and defend their territories with aerial displays. The nest itself is a simple scrape in the ground, in which the bird typically lays three or four eggs. The young of most species are precocial.[1] Sandpiper nest with four eggs Contents 1 Taxonomy 2 Evolution 3 Description 4 Distribution, habitat, and movements 5 Diet and feeding 6 Breeding 7 Gallery 8 Footnotes 9 References 10 External links Taxonomy[edit] The family Scolopacidae was introduced (as Scolopacea) by the French polymath Constantine Samuel Rafinesque in 1815.[2][3] The family contains 98 extant or recently extinct species divided into 15 genera.[4] For more details, see the article List of sandpiper species. Scolopacidae ? ? Bartramia – upland sandpiper ? ? Numenius – curlews (9 species) ? ? ? ? Limosa – godwits (4 species) ? ? ? ? Arenaria – turnstones (2 species) ? ? Calidris – sandpipers (24 species) ? ? ? ? ? Limnodromus – dowitchers (3 species) ? ? ? Scolopax – woodcocks (8 species) ? ? ? Coenocorypha – snipes (3 extant and 2 recently extinct species) ? ? Gallinago – snipes (18 species) ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Xenus – Terek sandpiper ? ? Phalaropus – phalaropes (3 species) ? ? ? ? Actitis – sandpipers (2 species) ? ? Tringa – sandpipers, tattlers etc (13 species) ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Phylogeny of the Scolopacidae based on a study by Rosemary Gibson and Allan Baker published in 2012. No specimens from the genera Prosobonia or Lymnocryptes were included. Though currently placed in Gallinago, the imperial snipe (Gallinago imperialis) was found to be more closely related to snipe in the genera Coenocorypha.[5] Evolution[edit] The early fossil record is very bad for a group that was probably present at the non-avian dinosaur's extinction. "Totanus" teruelensis (Late Miocene of Los Mansuetos (Spain) is sometimes considered a scolopacid – maybe a shank – but may well be a larid; little is known of it. Paractitis has been named from the Early Oligocene of Saskatchewan (Canada), while Mirolia is known from the Middle Miocene at Deiningen in the Nördlinger Ries (Germany). Most living genera would seem to have evolved throughout the Oligocene to Miocene with the waders perhaps a bit later; see the genus accounts for the fossil record. In addition there are some indeterminable remains that might belong to extant genera or their extinct relatives: Scolopacidae gen. et sp. indet. (Middle Miocene of Františkovy Lázn?, Czech Republic – Late Miocene of Kohfidisch, Austria) Scolopacidae gen. et sp. indet. (Edson Early Pliocene of Sherman County, USA)[note 1] Description[edit] The least sandpiper is the smallest species of sandpiper The sandpipers exhibit considerable range in size and appearance, the wide range of body forms reflecting a wide range of ecological niches. Sandpipers range in size from the least sandpiper, at as little as 18 grams (0.040 pounds) and 11 cm (4.3 in) in length, to the Far Eastern curlew, at up to 66 cm (26 in) in length, and the Eurasian curlew, at up to 1.3 kg (2.9 lb). Within species there is considerable variation in patterns of sexual dimorphism. Males are larger than females in ruffs and several sandpipers, but are smaller than females in the knots, curlews, phalaropes and godwits. The sexes are similarly sized in the snipes, woodcock and tringine sandpipers. Compared to the other large family of wading birds, the plovers (Charadriidae) they tend to have smaller eye, more slender heads, and longer thinner bills. Some are quite long-legged, and most species have three forward pointing toes with a smaller hind toe (the exception is the sanderling, which lacks a hind toe).[7] Sandpipers are more geared towards tactile foraging methods than the plovers, which favour more visual foraging methods, and this is reflected in the high density of tactile receptors in the tips of their bills. These receptors are housed in a slight horny swelling at the tip of the bill (except for the surfbird and the two turnstones). Bill shape is highly variable within the family, reflecting differences in feeding ecology. Bill length relative to head length varies from three times the length of the head in the long-billed curlew to just under half the head length in the Tuamotu sandpiper. Bills may be straight, slightly upcurled or strongly downcurved.[7] Like all birds, the bills of sandpipers are capable of cranial kinesis, literally being able to move the bones of the skull (other than the obvious movement of the lower jaw) and specifically bending the upper jaw without opening the entire jaw, an act known as rhynchokinesis. It has been hypothesized this helps when probing by allowing the bill to be partly opened with less force and improving manipulation of prey items in the substrate. Rhynchokinesis is also used by sandpipers feeding on prey in water to catch and manipulate prey.[8] Distribution, habitat, and movements[edit] Sandpipers spending the non-breeding season in Roebuck Bay, Western Australia The sandpipers have a cosmopolitan distribution, occurring across most of the world's land surfaces except for Antarctica and the driest deserts. A majority of the family breed at moderate to high latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere, in fact accounting for the most northerly breeding birds in the world. Only a few species breed in tropical regions, ten of which are snipes and woodcocks and the remaining species being the unusual Tuamotu sandpiper, which breeds in French Polynesia (although prior to the arrival of humans in the Pacific there were several other closely related species of Polynesian sandpiper).[7] Diet and feeding[edit] There are broadly four feeding styles employed by the sandpipers, although many species are flexible and may use more than one style. The first is pecking with occasional probing, usually done by species in drier habitats that do not have soft soils or mud. The second, and most frequent, method employed is probing soft soils, muds and sands for prey. The third, used by Tringa shanks, involves running in shallow water with the bill under the water chasing fish, a method that uses sight as well as tactile senses. The final method, employed by the phalaropes and some Calidris sandpipers, involves pecking at the water for small prey.[7] A few species of scolopacids are omnivorous to some extent, taking seeds and shoots as well as invertebrates. Breeding[edit] Many sandpipers form monogamous pairs, but some sandpipers have female-only parental care, some male-only parental care, some sequential polyandry and other compete for the mate on the lek. Sandpipers lay three or four eggs into the nest, which is usually a vague depression or scrape in the open ground, scarcely lined with soft vegetation.[7] In species where both parents incubate the eggs, females and males share their incubation duties in various ways both within and between species. In some pairs, parents exchange on the nest in the morning and in the evening so that their incubation rhythm follows a 24-hour day, in others each sex may sit on the nest continuously for up to 24 hours before it is exchanged by its partner.[9] In species where only a single parent incubates the eggs, during the night the parent sits on the eggs nearly continuously and then during the warmest part of a day leaves the nest for short feeding bouts.[10] Chicks hatch after about three weeks of incubation and are able to walk and forage within a few hours of hatching. A single parent or both parents guide and brood the chicks.[7] Gallery[edit] Bristle-thighed curlew (Numenius tahitiensis, right) and ruddy turnstones (Arenaria interpres) Common snipe (Gallinago gallinago) Greenshank (Tringa nebularia) Preening male ruff (Philomachus pugnax) Footnotes[edit] ^ A distal right tarsometatarsus of a bird roughly similar to a pectoral sandpiper. Probably calidrid or basal to them, somewhat reminiscent of turnstones.[6] References[edit] ^ a b Harrison, Colin J.O. (1991). Forshaw, Joseph (ed.). Encyclopaedia of Animals: Birds. London: Merehurst Press. pp. 103–105. ISBN 1-85391-186-0. ^ Rafinesque, Constantine Samuel (1815). Analyse de la nature ou, Tableau de l'univers et des corps organisés (in French). 1815. Palermo: Self-published. p. 70. ^ Bock, Walter J. (1994). History and Nomenclature of Avian Family-Group Names. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History. Number 222. New York: American Museum of Natural History. pp. 113, 252. hdl:2246/830. ^ Gill, Frank; Donsker, David; Rasmussen, Pamela, eds. (July 2021). "Sandpipers, snipes, coursers". IOC World Bird List Version 11.2. International Ornithologists' Union. Retrieved 18 November 2021. ^ Gibson, Rosemary; Baker, Allan (2012). "Multiple gene sequences resolve phylogenetic relationships in the shorebird suborder Scolopaci (Aves: Charadriiformes)". Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 64 (1): 66–72. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2012.03.008. ^ Wetmore, Alexander (1937). "The Eared Grebe and other Birds from the Pliocene of Kansas" (PDF). Condor. 39 (1): 40. doi:10.2307/1363487. JSTOR 1363487. ^ a b c d e f Piersma, Theunis (1996). "Family Scolopacidae (Snipes, Sandpipers and Phalaropes)". In del Hoyo, Josep; Elliott, Andrew; Sargatal, Jordi (eds.). Handbook of the Birds of the World. Volume 3, Hoatzin to Auks. Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. pp. 444–487. ISBN 978-84-87334-20-7. ^ Estrella, Sora; Masero, José A. (2007). "The use of distal rhynchokinesis by birds feeding in water". Journal of Experimental Biology. 210 (21): 3757–3762. doi:10.1242/jeb.007690. PMID 17951416. ^ Bulla, Martin; Valcu, Mihai; Dokter, Adriaan M.; Dondua, Alexei G.; Kosztolányi, András; Rutten, Anne L.; Helm, Barbara; Sandercock, Brett K.; Casler, Bruce (2016). "Unexpected diversity in socially synchronized rhythms of shorebirds" (PDF). Nature. 540 (7631): 109–113. Bibcode:2016Natur.540..109B. doi:10.1038/nature20563. PMID 27880762. S2CID 4390453. ^ Løfaldli, Lars (1985-01-01). "Incubation Rhythm in the Great Snipe Gallinago media". Holarctic Ecology. 8 (2): 107–112. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0587.1985.tb01160.x. JSTOR 3682650. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Scolopacidae. Sandpiper media on the Internet Bird Collection Cornell Lab of Ornithology sandpiper search results RedKnot.org links to shorebird recovery sites, movies, events & other information on red knot rufa and horseshoe crabs. v t e Sandpipers (family: Scolopacidae) Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Aves Order: Charadriiformes Scolopacidae (Numeniinae–Limosinae–Arenariinae) Numeniinae Bartramia Upland sandpiper (B. longicauda) Numenius (Curlews) Long-billed curlew (N. americanus) Eurasian curlew (N. arquata) Eskimo curlew (N. borealis) Hudsonian whimbrel (N. hudsonicus) Far Eastern curlew (N. madagascariensis) Little curlew (N. minutus) Eurasian whimbrel (N. phaeopus) Bristle-thighed curlew (N. tahitiensis) Slender-billed curlew (N. tenuirostris) Limosinae Limosa (Godwits) Marbled godwit (L. fedoa) Hudsonian godwit (L. haemastica) Bar-tailed godwit (L. lapponica) Black-tailed godwit (L. limosa) Arenariinae Arenaria (Turnstones) Ruddy turnstone (A. interpres) Black turnstone (A. melanocephala) Prosobonia Tuamotu sandpiper (P. parvirostris) Henderson sandpiper (P. sauli) Calidris Sharp-tailed sandpiper (C. acuminata) Sanderling (C. alba) Dunlin (C. alpina) Baird's sandpiper (C. bairdii) Red knot (C. canutus) Broad-billed sandpiper (C. falcinellus) Curlew sandpiper (C. ferruginea) White-rumped sandpiper (C. fuscicollis) Stilt sandpiper (C. himantopus) Purple sandpiper (C. maritima) Western sandpiper (C. mauri) Pectoral sandpiper (C. melanotos) Little stint (C. minuta) Least sandpiper (C. minutilla) Rock sandpiper (C. ptilocnemis) Ruff (C. pugnax) Semipalmated sandpiper (C. pusilla) Spoon-billed sandpiper (C. pygmaea) Red-necked stint (C. ruficollis) Long-toed stint (C. subminuta) Buff-breasted sandpiper (C. subruficollis) Temminck's stint (C. temminckii) Great knot (C. tenuirostris) Surfbird (C. virgata) Scolopacidae (Tringinae–Scolopacinae) Tringinae Xenus Terek sandpiper (X. cinereus) Phalaropus (Phalaropes) Red phalarope (P. fulicarius) Red-necked phalarope (P. lobatus) Wilson's phalarope (P. tricolor) Actitis Common sandpiper (A. hypoleucos) Spotted sandpiper (A. macularia) Tringa Grey-tailed tattler (T. brevipes) Spotted redshank (T. erythropus) Lesser yellowlegs (T. flavipes) Wood sandpiper (T. glareola) Nordmann's greenshank (T. guttifer) Wandering tattler (T. incana) Greater yellowlegs (T. melanoleuca) Common greenshank (T. nebularia) Green sandpiper (T. ochropus) Willet (T. semipalmata) Solitary sandpiper (T. solitaria) Marsh sandpiper (T. stagnatilis) Common redshank (T. totanus) Scolopacinae Lymnocryptes Jack snipe (L. minimus) Limnodromus (Dowitchers) Short-billed dowitcher (L. griseus) Long-billed dowitcher (L. scolopaceus) Asian dowitcher (L. semipalmatus) Scolopax (Woodcocks) Bukidnon woodcock (S. bukidnonensis) Sulawesi woodcock (S. celebensis) American woodcock (S. minor) Amami woodcock (S. mira) Moluccan woodcock (S. rochussenii) New Guinea woodcock (S. rosenbergii) Eurasian woodcock (S. rusticola) Javan woodcock (S. saturata) Coenocorypha Subantarctic snipe (C. aucklandica) Snares snipe (C. huegeli) Chatham snipe (C. pusilla) Gallinago (Snipes) Puna snipe (G. andina) Wilson's snipe (G. delicata) Common snipe (G. gallinago) Latham's snipe (G. hardwickii) Imperial snipe (G. imperialis) Jameson's snipe (G. jamesoni) Madagascar snipe (G. macrodactyla) Great snipe (G. media) Swinhoe's snipe (G. megala) Wood snipe (G. nemoricola) African snipe (G. nigripennis) Noble snipe (G. nobilis) South American snipe (G. paraguaiae) Solitary snipe (G. solitaria) Pin-tailed snipe (G. stenura) Fuegian snipe (G. stricklandii) Giant snipe (G. undulata) Based on Boyd (2019). Taxon identifiers Wikidata: Q26626 Wikispecies: Scolopacidae BOLD: 1431 EoL: 7988 EPPO: 1SCPCF Fauna Europaea: 10772 Fauna Europaea (new): 1f095266-519f-4c94-8aa3-c8194fcb8d75 Fossilworks: 39581 GBIF: 5282 iNaturalist: 3835 IRMNG: 101567 ITIS: 176568 NBN: NBNSYS0000160961 NCBI: 8917 NZOR: e4a00b79-83c4-47bb-bcd4-c4e0e9582989 WoRMS: 147429 Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) National libraries France (data) United States Japan Other Microsoft Academic Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sandpiper&oldid=1056039647" Categories: Sandpipers Extant Rupelian first appearances Taxa named by Constantine Samuel Rafinesque Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with GND identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with MA identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Languages ???????? Afrikaans Anarâškielâ ??????? Asturianu Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????????? ????????? Brezhoneg Català ??????? Cebuano ?eština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ??? ??????? ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ????? ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kotava Latina Latviešu Lietuvi? Livvinkarjala Magyar ?????? ???????? ?????????? Nederlands ??? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?????? ?????? Plattdüütsch Polski Português Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Scots Simple English Slovenš?ina ?????? / srpski Suomi Svenska ????? ??? Lea faka-Tonga Türkçe ?????????? Ti?ng Vi?t West-Vlams Winaray ?? ?? Zeêuws ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 19 November 2021, at 10:19 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement