https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scherzo_%C3%A0_la_Russe_(ballet) Scherzo à la Russe (ballet) - Wikipedia Scherzo à la Russe (ballet) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Ballet choreographed by George Balanchine Scherzo à la Russe Choreographer George Balanchine Music Igor Stravinsky Premiere June 21, 1972 (1972-06-21) New York State Theater Original ballet company New York City Ballet Design Karinska Ronald Bates Created for Karin von Aroldingen Kay Mazzo Genre neoclassical ballet Scherzo à la Russe is a ballet choreographed by George Balanchine to Stravinsky's music of the same name. The ballet was created for New York City Ballet's Stravinsky Festival, a tribute to the composer after his death, and premiered on June 21, 1972, at the New York State Theater, with the two lead roles originated by Karin von Aroldingen and Kay Mazzo. Contents 1 Production 2 Performances 3 Critical reception 4 References 5 External links Production[edit] Stravinsky and Balanchine collaborated for many years until the former's death in 1971.[1] The latter then decided to have the New York City Ballet hold the week-long Stravinsky Festival to honor the composer.[2]:?286? There were at least 20 premieres,[1] seven of which were choreographed by Balanchine.[3]:?317? One of the ballets made for the festival is set to Scherzo à la Russe, which Stravinsky wrote in 1925, for a film project that was abandoned.[4] The four-minute long ballet is performed by an all-female cast, with two principal dancers and a corps de ballet of sixteen. Karin von Aroldingen and Kay Mazzo originated the two lead roles.[2]:?296? The choreography resembles Russian folk dance. Von Aroldingen described, "You feel like a child or a doll when you do it. The whole thing is a smile. It's over so fast. That surprise short ending – it just stops dead – shows Stravinsky's humor."[2]:?296? The costumes were designed by Karinska, with the dancers in white Russian style dresses and crown-like headdress. The original lighting was designed by Ronald Bates.[2]:?296? The choreography of the ballet was revised in 1982.[5] Performances[edit] Scherzo à la Russe premiered on June 21, 1972, at the New York State Theater.[3]:?415?[4] In addition to the New York City Ballet, the ballet had also been performed by students of the School of American Ballet.[6] Critical reception[edit] Following the premiere, New York Times critic Clive Barnes commented that the ballet "is a slight joke but warm one." He added, "Balanchine has taken this easy, almost succulent music, and made, slightly irreverently, the kind of Nursemaids’ Dance that he feels that Fokine should have contributed to Petrushka. It is brief, clever and lightly betwitching."[4] References[edit] ^ a b Kisselgoff, Anna (June 17, 1972). "City Ballet Opens Salute To Stravinsky Tomorrow". New York Times. ^ a b c d Reynolds, Nancy (1977). Repertory in Review: 40 Years of the New York City Ballet. ISBN 9780803773684. ^ a b Taper, Bernard (1987). Balanchine: A Biography. ISBN 9780520060593. ^ a b c Barnes, Clive (June 22, 1972). "Dance: More Glimpses of Stravinsky". New York Times. ^ Kisselgoff, Anna (June 16, 1993). "Review/Dance; A Cluster of Stravinsky". New York Times. ^ Macaulay, Alastair (September 23, 2012). "Even When There's a Him Around, Balanchine Is Still About Her". New York Times. External links[edit] Scherzo à la Russe on New York City Ballet's website Scherzo à la Russe on George Balanchine Trust's website v t e Ballets by George Balanchine A la Françaix A Midsummer Night's Dream Agon Allegro Brillante Apollo Le baiser de la fée Le Bal Ballade Ballo della Regina Bayou Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme Bourrée fantasque Brahms–Schoenberg Quartet Bugaku Chaconne Le chant du rossignol Circus Polka Clarinade Concertino Concerto Barocco Coppélia Cortège Hongrois Divertimento Brillante Divertimento from “Le Baiser De La Fée” Divertimento No. 15 Don Quixote Donizetti Variations Duo Concertant Élégie L'enfant et les sortilèges Episodes Etude for Piano The Firebird The Four Temperaments Garland Dance Gounod Symphony Haieff Divertimento Harlequinade Hungarian Gypsy Airs Ivesiana Jeu de cartes Jewels Kammermusik No. 2 Liebeslieder Walzer Meditation Metamorphoses Metastaseis and Pithoprakta Monumentum pro Gesualdo Movements for Piano and Orchestra Mozartiana Noah and the Flood The Nutcracker Orpheus Pas de Dix Pas de Trois (Glinka) Pas de Trois (Minkus) Pavane Prodigal Son Pulcinella Ragtime I Ragtime II Raymonda Variations Requiem Canticles Robert Schumann’s Davidsbündlertänze Scherzo à la Russe Scotch Symphony Serenade The Seven Deadly Sins Slaughter on Tenth Avenue La Sonnambula Sonatine La source Square Dance Stars and Stripes The Steadfast Tin Soldier Stravinsky Violin Concerto Swan Lake Sylvia Pas de Deux Symphonie Concertante Symphony in C Symphony in Three Movements Tango Tarantella Theme and Variations Le tombeau de Couperin Tschaikovsky Pas de Deux Tschaikovsky Piano Concerto No. 2 Tschaikovsky Suite No. 3 Tzigane Union Jack La valse Valse-Fantaisie Variations Variations for Orchestra Variations Pour une Porte et un Soupir Vienna Waltzes Walpurgisnacht Ballet Western Symphony Who Cares? Zenobia List of ballets by George Balanchine Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scherzo_à_la_Russe_(ballet)&oldid=1056754749" Categories: 1972 ballet premieres Ballets by George Balanchine Ballets to the music of Igor Stravinsky New York City Ballet repertory Hidden categories: Use mdy dates from October 2021 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Add links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 10:18 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement