https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tables_game Tables game - Wikipedia Tables game From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Class of board game This article is about the class of board game. For the type of casino game, see Table game. Tables family A backgammon board from Damascus Players 2 (more in some variants) Setup time 0–30 seconds Playing time 5–30 minutes Random chance Dice Skills required Strategy, probability Tables games are a class of board games that includes backgammon and which are played on a tables board, typically with two rows of 12 vertical markings called "points". Players roll dice to determine the movement of pieces. Tables games are among the oldest known board games, and many variants are played throughout the world. They are called "tables" games because the boards consist of four quadrants called tables in French. They should not be confused with table games which are casino gambling games like roulette or blackjack. Contents 1 History 2 Europe 2.1 France 2.1.1 Trictrac 2.1.2 Jacquet 2.1.3 Tourne Case 2.2 Greece and Cyprus 2.3 Romania 2.4 Sweden 3 Far East 3.1 Sugoruku 4 Middle East and Central Asia 4.1 Mahbusa 4.2 Narde 4.3 Gul bara 4.4 Tavla 4.5 Hapis 5 Backgammon 6 Historical variants 7 See also 8 Footnotes 9 References 10 Literature 11 External links History[edit] The ancient Egyptians played a game called Senet, which belonged to the same family of race games as modern tables games, with moves controlled by the roll of dice as early as 3500 BC.[1] The Royal Game of Ur, played in ancient Mesopotamia, is another member of the family. Recent excavations at the "Burnt City" in Iran showed that a similar game existed there around 3000 BC. The artifacts include two dice and 60 pieces. The set is believed to be 100 to 200 years older than the sets found in Ur.[2] Though they are all race games they cannot be direct ancestors of backgammon.[citation needed] A game of tabula (Byzantine Greek: ?????) was played by Byzantine Emperor Zeno in 480 and recorded by Agathias in 530 circa because of a very unlucky dice throw for Zeno (red), as he threw 2, 5 and 6 and was forced to leave eight pieces alone and thus vulnerable.[3] Roman Tabula (Byzantine Greek: T????) was nearly identical to modern backgammon; it was described in an epigram of the Byzantine Emperor Zeno (AD 476–481).[3] The board was the same with 24 points, 12 on each side, players moved their pieces in opposite directions, and the dice were cubes as today.[3] As in backgammon the object of the game was to be the first to bear off all of one's counters, of which there were, as in backgammon, fifteen per player.[3][4] Hitting a blot (i.e. moving to a point occupied by just one enemy counter so that it has to be removed), reentering a piece from the bar (the raised border between the two halves of the board), and bearing off (removing counters when they have reached the last point), all had the same rules as today. The chief differences from modern backgammon were the use of three rather than two dice, the starting of all pieces off the board (with them entering in the same way that pieces on the bar enter in modern backgammon), and naturally no doubling cube (which was introduced in the 1920s).[5][6] The same word (?????) is still used to refer to backgammon in Greece today,[7] where it remains a popular game played in central village squares (plateias) and coffee houses. The tabula of Zeno's time is believed to be a direct descendant of the earlier ancient Roman Ludus duodecim scriptorum ("game of twelve lines" or, better, "game of twelve signs") with that board's middle row of points removed, and only the two outer rows remaining.[4] Ludus duodecim scriptorum used a board with three rows of 12 points each, and the pieces were moved across all three rows according to the roll of three dice.[8] The earliest known mention of the game is in Ovid's Ars Amatoria (The Art of Love) (written between 1 BC and 8 AD). Burzoe demonstrates the game of nard to the Indian Rajas In the 11th century Shahnameh, the Persian poet Ferdowsi credits Burzoe with the invention of the game of nard in the 6th century. He describes an encounter between Burzoe and a Raja visiting from India. The Raja introduces the game of chess, and Burzoe demonstrates nard, played with dice made from ivory and teak.[9] In 1254, Louis IX issued a decree prohibiting his court officials and subjects from playing dice games.[10] While it is mostly known for its extensive discussion of chess, the Alfonso X manuscript Libro de los juegos, completed in 1283, describes rules for a number of dice and tables games.[11] In English, the word "tables" is derived from Latin tabula. Its first use referring to board games documented by the Oxford English Dictionary was circa AD 700.[12] Tables should not be confused with Tafl, an unrelated class of board games (albeit linguistically related) played in medieval Scandinavia. Tâb and tablan (as well as the related games sáhkku and daldøs) may, on the other hand, be descendants of tabula. Europe[edit] France[edit] Trictrac[edit] Main article: Trictrac Trictrac was the classic French tables game of the 17th and 18th centuries in the same way that backgammon that now is in the English-speaking world.[13] There are two main forms of the game, le Grand Trictrac and le Petit Trictrac.[14] Unlike backgammon it is not a race game; rather the main aim is to score points. In Trictrac, the starting point is called a talon, the points, or fleches, are numbered to 12 on both sides of the board, with the 12th point on either side called the coin de repos, or, simply, coin. The 11th point (on either side) is often called le case d'écolier, or 'schoolboy's point' (case meaning 'square', literally) after the tendency of inexperienced players to rush to this point too soon in the game.[15] Statistically, the most difficult points in the game to reach aside from the coins are the 8th points, and they are named les fleches de diable, or 'the Devil's points', for this reason.[16] The home boards are referred to as the jan de retour by either player. Doubles are treated as two identical numbers, unlike backgammon proper.[17] Jacquet[edit] Main article: Jacquet (game) Trictrac was superseded by the much simpler game of Jacquet during the 19th century, a race game similar to backgammon, but with a number of distinctive features. First, players circulated the board in the same direction rather than in opposing directions. Second, players could not move the majority of their pieces until the first piece, the 'courier' or 'postilion', had reached the final quadrant.[18] Jacquet was largely ousted by Anglo-American games in the 1960s, but its rules are still published and boards are still manufactured.[13][19] Tourne Case[edit] Main article: Tourne Case Tourne Case is another old French tables game and more one of chance than skill. Using a tables board, each player only takes 3 pieces. The aim is to enter them onto the board using the throws of the dice and be first to move all 3 to the 'home corner' (coin de repos) on the 12th point of the board. The men may not pass over one another nor may there be more than one on a point except in the home corner. If a man moves to a point opposite that of an opposing man, the latter is 'hit'. It must be removed from the board and re-entered from the start.[20] Greece and Cyprus[edit] In Greece, tables games are called tavli (related to the word tavla, meaning "board" or "table" or "tawleh" from Arabic, and cognate to the Latin tabula). "Tavli" was first described in an epigram of the Byzantine Emperor Zeno (AD 476–481).[3] There are three mainstream different games, portes, plakoto, and fevga: Portes closely resembles backgammon, with minor variations: there is no doubling cube, and a backgammon, i.e when a player wins triple,[a] counts only as a gammon , i.e. winning double (called diplo, Greek for double).[b] Plakoto is very similar to the mahbusa or tapa game. It has some general similarities with Portes, with different initial placement of the pieces and with pinning of blots (moving a counter to a point with one enemy counter so that it cannot move) instead of hitting them out. Fevga is similar to narde or the Turkish variant moultezim. There are no blots, therefore a point is blocked to the opponent even when occupied by a single piece. The three games are normally played consecutively, in three-, five- or seven-point matches. There are also other variants like Sfaktes which means slayers,[21] and Evraiko (Jewish), a much simpler game depending entirely on luck with no room for skill. Romania[edit] In Romania, tabl? (meaning "board", cognate of the Latin tabula) is similar to backgammon, with two variations: there is no doubling cube and a backgammon counts only as a gammon (called mar?). Matches are usually played to three points. Sweden[edit] Brädspel ("board game") game recovered from the Swedish 17th century warship Vasa. Bräde or svenskt brädspel ("Swedish board game") is a variant played in Sweden. Players start with all 15 of their counters on opposite corners of the board, and play around counter-clockwise. Besides bearing off, there are several other ways to win, such as arranging all of one's counters in certain pre-determined patterns, or by hitting so many counters that one's opponent can not bring them in again. Additional points are awarded for a victory while one's opponent has counters on the bar. Brädspel is played without the doubling cube.[22] Interest in brädspel experienced a resurgence following the recovery of a 17th-century board from the wreck of the Vasa.[23] A game of Tables was also recovered from the wreck of the Mary Rose which sank a century earlier in 1545. It is on display at the Mary Rose Museum in Portsmouth.[24] Tables game found in the shipwreck of the Mary Rose Far East[edit] Sugoruku[edit] Main article: Sugoroku There are two games known as sugoroku (??) in Japan. One more closely resembles Snakes and Ladders, while the other is played on a 24-point tables board, using standard tables equipment. The starting position is identical to that of backgammon. It differs from most other tables variants in that the pieces are never borne off. Additionally, the use of primes is not permitted. Middle East and Central Asia[edit] The game known in the West as backgammon is played widely in the Middle East and Central Asia. It is known as tawlah in Arabic (meaning "table"), and is referred to as takhte nard in Iran. In Israel and many Arabic speaking countries, the game is known as "shesh besh", which is a combination for the sake of the rhyme of Persian "shesh" (six) and Turkish "besh" (five). The name nardshir comes from the Persian nard (Wooden block) and shir (lion) referring to the two type of pieces used in play. A common legend associates the game with the founder of the Sassanian dynasty, Ardashir I. The oldest known reference to the game is thought to be a passage in the Talmud. Many of the early Arabic texts which refer to the game comment on the debate regarding the legality and morality of playing the game. This debate was settled by the eighth century when all four Muslim schools of jurisprudence declared the game to be Haraam (forbidden), however the game is still played today in many Arab countries. Mahbusa[edit] Mahbusa means "imprisoned". Each player begins with 15 counters on his opponent's 24-point. If a counter is hit, it is not placed on the bar, but instead, the hitting piece is placed on top, and the point is then controlled by the hitting player. The counter which has been hit is 'imprisoned' and cannot be moved until the opponent removes his piece. Sometimes, a rule is used that requires a player to bring his first counter around to his home board before moving any others. In any case, a rapid advance to one's own home board is desirable, as imprisoning the opponent's counter there is highly advantageous. Mahbusa is similar to tapa. A feature of tables play in some Arab countries is that Persian numbers, rather than Arabic ones, are called out by a player announcing his dice rolls.[citation needed] Narde[edit] The Backgammon Players by Theodoor Rombouts, 1634 People in the Iranian plateau and Caucasus region, especially in Azerbaijan, Iran, Armenia, Georgia, Uzbekistan and Russia, are very fond of playing narde. All 15 of a player's counters are initially positioned on his own 24-point, but there is a major difference. One is forbidden to put his counter at a point occupied by one's opponent's counter, so there is no hitting or imprisonment in the long narde game. The main strategy is to secure playing "big pairs" by one's own counter and prevent as much as possible doing the same by the opponent. The game is known as 'Fevga' in Greece, 'Moultezim' in Turkey, Mahbusa in the Middle East and 'Ifranjiah' or Frankish in Arabia. It can also be spelt as 'Nard' or 'Nardi'. A version known as short narde is a simplified form of Ifranjiah. In Georgia, ifranjiah is played as elsewhere, but called "nardi". In Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Russia many experienced players also play long narde, which some see as requiring deeper strategy. One of the most famous narde championships is the championship of Azerbaijan - Gizil Zar - Golden Dawn. The winner is awarded with gold dice. Gul bara[edit] Main article: Gul bara Gul bara, sometimes referred to as "rosespring backgammon" or "crazy narde", is a variant where there is no hitting. Tavla[edit] Women playing tavla in Turkey. Tavla (from Medieval Greek ?????[3] or from Arabic "tawleh"), is a tables game in Turkey very similar to backgammon. The major difference is in tavla the doubling cube is not used. Also in tavla both gammons and backgammons are counted as two points called mars and the players are not allowed to hit and run in their home boards as in backgammon.[25] Matches are usually played to five points. There are many variants of tavla in Turkey, where the course of play changes drastically. The usual tavla is also known as erkek tavlas? meaning boys' or men's tavla. The other variant k?z tavlas? (meaning girls' tavla) is a game which depends only on the dice and involves no strategy. There is another variant called asker tavlas? (meaning soldiers' tavla) where the pieces are thrown to the board randomly and the opponents try to flip their pieces over the opponents' pieces to beat them. The player with no pieces left loses the game. This variant doesn't involve dice at all and the play depends more on hand-eye coordination than tactical decision making. Üniversite tavlas? (university tavla) is a variant of the game played with two or more tavlas and four or more players, with the players forming groups. The dice are thrown only by two opposing players and the rest must play the same dice. If a team member gets beaten and cannot enter, his teammates cannot play for that round. Although the dice are the same, the game on every board differs, where the case of one team member winning and another losing is very common. This variant is considered much harder because the player must take more than one play into account while only being capable of making decisions on his own board. Hapis[edit] Hapis (Turkish for "prison") is another tables game played in Turkey. It is very similar to Mahbusa played in the Arab World. Backgammon[edit] A backgammon set, with two dice cups and a doubling cube Main article: Backgammon In backgammon, two players move their pieces in opposing directions, according to the rolls of dice. The use of a doubling cube allows players to increase the stakes of the game. The basis of the modern game can be traced to Medieval and Renaissance sources. Backgammon has been studied considerably by computer scientists, who have developed software that plays at the level of top human players. Historical variants[edit] Seis, dos, y as from the 13th century Libro de los juegos Many of the ancestors of modern tables games are no longer widely played. Irish, 16th and 17th century British game; directly ancestral to Backgammon. Games described in the 13th century Libro de los juegos: Doublets El Mundo Imperator Seven-sided backgammon Six, Deuce, and Ace Tabula, 2nd century Roman game. Ludus duodecim scriptorum, Roman game dating back to the 2nd century B.C. See also[edit] Mancala ('sowing' or seed games) Footnotes[edit] ^ Winning triple, that is by bearing off all the counters while the opponent has yet to bear any off and has still counters on the winner's home board or on the bar. ^ Winning double occurs when the player bears off all the counters while the opponent has yet to bear any off. References[edit] ^ Hayes, William C. "Egyptian Tomb Reliefs of the Old Kingdom", The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin, New Series 4:7. March 1946. pp 170-178. ^ "Iran's Burnt City Throws up World’s Oldest Backgammon." Persian Journal. December 4, 2004. Retrieved on August 5, 2006. ^ a b c d e f Austin, Roland G (1934). "Zeno's Game of ?????". The Journal of Hellenic Studies. 54 (2): 202–205. doi:10.2307/626864. JSTOR 626864. ^ a b Austin, Roland G. (February 1935). "Roman Board Games. II". Greece & Rome. 4 (11): 76–82. doi:10.1017/s0017383500003119. ^ Robert Charles Bell, Board and table games from many civilizations, Courier Dover Publications, 1979, ISBN 0-486-23855-5, pp. 33-35. ^ Jacoby, Oswald; Crawford, John R. (1970). The Backgammon Book. New York: Viking Press. p. 51. ISBN 0-670-14409-6. ^ Koukoules, Phaidon (1948). Vyzantinon Vios kai Politismos. 1. Collection de l'institut français d'Athènes. pp. 200–204. ^ Austin, Roland G. "Roman Board Games. I", Greece & Rome 4:10, October 1934. pp. 24-34. ^ Wilkinson, Charles K. "Chessmen and Chess", The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin. New Series 1:9, May 1943. pp. 271-279 ^ Lillich, Meredith Parsons. "The Tric-Trac Window of Le Mans", The Art Bulletin 65:1, March 1983. pp. 23-33. ^ Wollesen, Jens T. "Sub specie ludi...: Text and Images in Alfonso El Sabio's Libro de Acedrex, Dados e Tablas", Zeitschrift für Kunstgeschichte 53:3, 1990. pp. 277-308. ^ "table, n.", The Oxford English Dictionary. Second Edition, 1989. (Subscription required) ^ a b Parlett (1999), p. 86. ^ Soumille, Abbot (abbé) Bernard Laurent (1738). Le Grand Trictrac. Ou Méthode Facile pour Apprendre san Maître (in French). Avignon: Chez F.Girard & D. Seguin. p. 320NUC: Library of Congress, University of Chicago.CS1 maint: postscript (link) ^ Murray, H. J. R. (1978). A History of Board Games Other than Chess. Hacker Art Books. p. 279. ISBN 978-0-87817-211-5. ^ Ibid. ^ Le Jeu de Trictrac. Paris: Chez Henry Charpentier. 1701. p. 198ASIN: B004FKIFEY.CS1 maint: postscript (link) ^ Fiske (1905), p. 183. ^ Le jeu de Jacquet at salondesjeux.fr. Retrieved 29 October 2021. ^ Fallavel (1715), pp. 63–77. ^ "Tavli (Greek Backgammon)". Backgammon Galore. Retrieved on August 8, 2006. ^ Helmfrid, Sten, et al. The Game of Swedish Tables [PDF]. February 26, 2003. Retrieved on August 12, 2006. ^ "Vasamuseet — The Swedish-Tables Association" Archived 2006-05-18 at the Wayback Machine, The Vasa Museum. Retrieved on August 12, 2006. ^ "Tudor Games & Indoor Pastimes". ^ Tavla Literature[edit] Fallavel J.M. (1715). Le Jeu du trictrac, Enrichi De Figures Avec les Jeux du Revertier, du Toute-Table, du Tourne-Case, de Dames Rabattues, du Plain et du Toc. 3rd edn. Paris: Henry Charpentier. Fiske, Willard (1905). Chess in Iceland and Icelandic Literature: with historical notes on other table-games. Florence: Florentine Typographical Society. Parlett, David (1999). The Oxford History of Board Games. Oxford: OUP, pp. 75–76 and 86. ISBN 9780192129987 External links[edit] Variants on Backgammon Galore v t e Tables games Historical Irish Jacquet Laquet Lourche Ludus duodecim scriptorum Royal Game of Ur Senet Tabula Tourne Case Trictrac Modern Acey-deucey Gul bara Plakoto Ssangryuk Sugoroku Tapa Backgammon Notation Opening Chouette FIBS Rollouts Categories Backgammon Tables Players Glossary Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tables_game&oldid=1056086313" Categories: Tables games Traditional board games Sport in Iran Hidden categories: CS1 maint: postscript CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2011 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) Català Deutsch ???????? Français ???? Român? ??????? Svenska ?????????? Vepsän kel’ Edit links This page was last edited on 19 November 2021, at 17:15 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tables_game Tables game - Wikipedia Tables game From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Class of board game This article is about the class of board game. For the type of casino game, see Table game. Tables family A backgammon board from Damascus Players 2 (more in some variants) Setup time 0–30 seconds Playing time 5–30 minutes Random chance Dice Skills required Strategy, probability Tables games are a class of board games that includes backgammon and which are played on a tables board, typically with two rows of 12 vertical markings called "points". Players roll dice to determine the movement of pieces. Tables games are among the oldest known board games, and many variants are played throughout the world. They are called "tables" games because the boards consist of four quadrants called tables in French. They should not be confused with table games which are casino gambling games like roulette or blackjack. Contents 1 History 2 Europe 2.1 France 2.1.1 Trictrac 2.1.2 Jacquet 2.1.3 Tourne Case 2.2 Greece and Cyprus 2.3 Romania 2.4 Sweden 3 Far East 3.1 Sugoruku 4 Middle East and Central Asia 4.1 Mahbusa 4.2 Narde 4.3 Gul bara 4.4 Tavla 4.5 Hapis 5 Backgammon 6 Historical variants 7 See also 8 Footnotes 9 References 10 Literature 11 External links History[edit] The ancient Egyptians played a game called Senet, which belonged to the same family of race games as modern tables games, with moves controlled by the roll of dice as early as 3500 BC.[1] The Royal Game of Ur, played in ancient Mesopotamia, is another member of the family. Recent excavations at the "Burnt City" in Iran showed that a similar game existed there around 3000 BC. The artifacts include two dice and 60 pieces. The set is believed to be 100 to 200 years older than the sets found in Ur.[2] Though they are all race games they cannot be direct ancestors of backgammon.[citation needed] A game of tabula (Byzantine Greek: ?????) was played by Byzantine Emperor Zeno in 480 and recorded by Agathias in 530 circa because of a very unlucky dice throw for Zeno (red), as he threw 2, 5 and 6 and was forced to leave eight pieces alone and thus vulnerable.[3] Roman Tabula (Byzantine Greek: T????) was nearly identical to modern backgammon; it was described in an epigram of the Byzantine Emperor Zeno (AD 476–481).[3] The board was the same with 24 points, 12 on each side, players moved their pieces in opposite directions, and the dice were cubes as today.[3] As in backgammon the object of the game was to be the first to bear off all of one's counters, of which there were, as in backgammon, fifteen per player.[3][4] Hitting a blot (i.e. moving to a point occupied by just one enemy counter so that it has to be removed), reentering a piece from the bar (the raised border between the two halves of the board), and bearing off (removing counters when they have reached the last point), all had the same rules as today. The chief differences from modern backgammon were the use of three rather than two dice, the starting of all pieces off the board (with them entering in the same way that pieces on the bar enter in modern backgammon), and naturally no doubling cube (which was introduced in the 1920s).[5][6] The same word (?????) is still used to refer to backgammon in Greece today,[7] where it remains a popular game played in central village squares (plateias) and coffee houses. The tabula of Zeno's time is believed to be a direct descendant of the earlier ancient Roman Ludus duodecim scriptorum ("game of twelve lines" or, better, "game of twelve signs") with that board's middle row of points removed, and only the two outer rows remaining.[4] Ludus duodecim scriptorum used a board with three rows of 12 points each, and the pieces were moved across all three rows according to the roll of three dice.[8] The earliest known mention of the game is in Ovid's Ars Amatoria (The Art of Love) (written between 1 BC and 8 AD). Burzoe demonstrates the game of nard to the Indian Rajas In the 11th century Shahnameh, the Persian poet Ferdowsi credits Burzoe with the invention of the game of nard in the 6th century. He describes an encounter between Burzoe and a Raja visiting from India. The Raja introduces the game of chess, and Burzoe demonstrates nard, played with dice made from ivory and teak.[9] In 1254, Louis IX issued a decree prohibiting his court officials and subjects from playing dice games.[10] While it is mostly known for its extensive discussion of chess, the Alfonso X manuscript Libro de los juegos, completed in 1283, describes rules for a number of dice and tables games.[11] In English, the word "tables" is derived from Latin tabula. Its first use referring to board games documented by the Oxford English Dictionary was circa AD 700.[12] Tables should not be confused with Tafl, an unrelated class of board games (albeit linguistically related) played in medieval Scandinavia. Tâb and tablan (as well as the related games sáhkku and daldøs) may, on the other hand, be descendants of tabula. Europe[edit] France[edit] Trictrac[edit] Main article: Trictrac Trictrac was the classic French tables game of the 17th and 18th centuries in the same way that backgammon that now is in the English-speaking world.[13] There are two main forms of the game, le Grand Trictrac and le Petit Trictrac.[14] Unlike backgammon it is not a race game; rather the main aim is to score points. In Trictrac, the starting point is called a talon, the points, or fleches, are numbered to 12 on both sides of the board, with the 12th point on either side called the coin de repos, or, simply, coin. The 11th point (on either side) is often called le case d'écolier, or 'schoolboy's point' (case meaning 'square', literally) after the tendency of inexperienced players to rush to this point too soon in the game.[15] Statistically, the most difficult points in the game to reach aside from the coins are the 8th points, and they are named les fleches de diable, or 'the Devil's points', for this reason.[16] The home boards are referred to as the jan de retour by either player. Doubles are treated as two identical numbers, unlike backgammon proper.[17] Jacquet[edit] Main article: Jacquet (game) Trictrac was superseded by the much simpler game of Jacquet during the 19th century, a race game similar to backgammon, but with a number of distinctive features. First, players circulated the board in the same direction rather than in opposing directions. Second, players could not move the majority of their pieces until the first piece, the 'courier' or 'postilion', had reached the final quadrant.[18] Jacquet was largely ousted by Anglo-American games in the 1960s, but its rules are still published and boards are still manufactured.[13][19] Tourne Case[edit] Main article: Tourne Case Tourne Case is another old French tables game and more one of chance than skill. Using a tables board, each player only takes 3 pieces. The aim is to enter them onto the board using the throws of the dice and be first to move all 3 to the 'home corner' (coin de repos) on the 12th point of the board. The men may not pass over one another nor may there be more than one on a point except in the home corner. If a man moves to a point opposite that of an opposing man, the latter is 'hit'. It must be removed from the board and re-entered from the start.[20] Greece and Cyprus[edit] In Greece, tables games are called tavli (related to the word tavla, meaning "board" or "table" or "tawleh" from Arabic, and cognate to the Latin tabula). "Tavli" was first described in an epigram of the Byzantine Emperor Zeno (AD 476–481).[3] There are three mainstream different games, portes, plakoto, and fevga: Portes closely resembles backgammon, with minor variations: there is no doubling cube, and a backgammon, i.e when a player wins triple,[a] counts only as a gammon , i.e. winning double (called diplo, Greek for double).[b] Plakoto is very similar to the mahbusa or tapa game. It has some general similarities with Portes, with different initial placement of the pieces and with pinning of blots (moving a counter to a point with one enemy counter so that it cannot move) instead of hitting them out. Fevga is similar to narde or the Turkish variant moultezim. There are no blots, therefore a point is blocked to the opponent even when occupied by a single piece. The three games are normally played consecutively, in three-, five- or seven-point matches. There are also other variants like Sfaktes which means slayers,[21] and Evraiko (Jewish), a much simpler game depending entirely on luck with no room for skill. Romania[edit] In Romania, tabl? (meaning "board", cognate of the Latin tabula) is similar to backgammon, with two variations: there is no doubling cube and a backgammon counts only as a gammon (called mar?). Matches are usually played to three points. Sweden[edit] Brädspel ("board game") game recovered from the Swedish 17th century warship Vasa. Bräde or svenskt brädspel ("Swedish board game") is a variant played in Sweden. Players start with all 15 of their counters on opposite corners of the board, and play around counter-clockwise. Besides bearing off, there are several other ways to win, such as arranging all of one's counters in certain pre-determined patterns, or by hitting so many counters that one's opponent can not bring them in again. Additional points are awarded for a victory while one's opponent has counters on the bar. Brädspel is played without the doubling cube.[22] Interest in brädspel experienced a resurgence following the recovery of a 17th-century board from the wreck of the Vasa.[23] A game of Tables was also recovered from the wreck of the Mary Rose which sank a century earlier in 1545. It is on display at the Mary Rose Museum in Portsmouth.[24] Tables game found in the shipwreck of the Mary Rose Far East[edit] Sugoruku[edit] Main article: Sugoroku There are two games known as sugoroku (??) in Japan. One more closely resembles Snakes and Ladders, while the other is played on a 24-point tables board, using standard tables equipment. The starting position is identical to that of backgammon. It differs from most other tables variants in that the pieces are never borne off. Additionally, the use of primes is not permitted. Middle East and Central Asia[edit] The game known in the West as backgammon is played widely in the Middle East and Central Asia. It is known as tawlah in Arabic (meaning "table"), and is referred to as takhte nard in Iran. In Israel and many Arabic speaking countries, the game is known as "shesh besh", which is a combination for the sake of the rhyme of Persian "shesh" (six) and Turkish "besh" (five). The name nardshir comes from the Persian nard (Wooden block) and shir (lion) referring to the two type of pieces used in play. A common legend associates the game with the founder of the Sassanian dynasty, Ardashir I. The oldest known reference to the game is thought to be a passage in the Talmud. Many of the early Arabic texts which refer to the game comment on the debate regarding the legality and morality of playing the game. This debate was settled by the eighth century when all four Muslim schools of jurisprudence declared the game to be Haraam (forbidden), however the game is still played today in many Arab countries. Mahbusa[edit] Mahbusa means "imprisoned". Each player begins with 15 counters on his opponent's 24-point. If a counter is hit, it is not placed on the bar, but instead, the hitting piece is placed on top, and the point is then controlled by the hitting player. The counter which has been hit is 'imprisoned' and cannot be moved until the opponent removes his piece. Sometimes, a rule is used that requires a player to bring his first counter around to his home board before moving any others. In any case, a rapid advance to one's own home board is desirable, as imprisoning the opponent's counter there is highly advantageous. Mahbusa is similar to tapa. A feature of tables play in some Arab countries is that Persian numbers, rather than Arabic ones, are called out by a player announcing his dice rolls.[citation needed] Narde[edit] The Backgammon Players by Theodoor Rombouts, 1634 People in the Iranian plateau and Caucasus region, especially in Azerbaijan, Iran, Armenia, Georgia, Uzbekistan and Russia, are very fond of playing narde. All 15 of a player's counters are initially positioned on his own 24-point, but there is a major difference. One is forbidden to put his counter at a point occupied by one's opponent's counter, so there is no hitting or imprisonment in the long narde game. The main strategy is to secure playing "big pairs" by one's own counter and prevent as much as possible doing the same by the opponent. The game is known as 'Fevga' in Greece, 'Moultezim' in Turkey, Mahbusa in the Middle East and 'Ifranjiah' or Frankish in Arabia. It can also be spelt as 'Nard' or 'Nardi'. A version known as short narde is a simplified form of Ifranjiah. In Georgia, ifranjiah is played as elsewhere, but called "nardi". In Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Russia many experienced players also play long narde, which some see as requiring deeper strategy. One of the most famous narde championships is the championship of Azerbaijan - Gizil Zar - Golden Dawn. The winner is awarded with gold dice. Gul bara[edit] Main article: Gul bara Gul bara, sometimes referred to as "rosespring backgammon" or "crazy narde", is a variant where there is no hitting. Tavla[edit] Women playing tavla in Turkey. Tavla (from Medieval Greek ?????[3] or from Arabic "tawleh"), is a tables game in Turkey very similar to backgammon. The major difference is in tavla the doubling cube is not used. Also in tavla both gammons and backgammons are counted as two points called mars and the players are not allowed to hit and run in their home boards as in backgammon.[25] Matches are usually played to five points. There are many variants of tavla in Turkey, where the course of play changes drastically. The usual tavla is also known as erkek tavlas? meaning boys' or men's tavla. The other variant k?z tavlas? (meaning girls' tavla) is a game which depends only on the dice and involves no strategy. There is another variant called asker tavlas? (meaning soldiers' tavla) where the pieces are thrown to the board randomly and the opponents try to flip their pieces over the opponents' pieces to beat them. The player with no pieces left loses the game. This variant doesn't involve dice at all and the play depends more on hand-eye coordination than tactical decision making. Üniversite tavlas? (university tavla) is a variant of the game played with two or more tavlas and four or more players, with the players forming groups. The dice are thrown only by two opposing players and the rest must play the same dice. If a team member gets beaten and cannot enter, his teammates cannot play for that round. Although the dice are the same, the game on every board differs, where the case of one team member winning and another losing is very common. This variant is considered much harder because the player must take more than one play into account while only being capable of making decisions on his own board. Hapis[edit] Hapis (Turkish for "prison") is another tables game played in Turkey. It is very similar to Mahbusa played in the Arab World. Backgammon[edit] A backgammon set, with two dice cups and a doubling cube Main article: Backgammon In backgammon, two players move their pieces in opposing directions, according to the rolls of dice. The use of a doubling cube allows players to increase the stakes of the game. The basis of the modern game can be traced to Medieval and Renaissance sources. Backgammon has been studied considerably by computer scientists, who have developed software that plays at the level of top human players. Historical variants[edit] Seis, dos, y as from the 13th century Libro de los juegos Many of the ancestors of modern tables games are no longer widely played. Irish, 16th and 17th century British game; directly ancestral to Backgammon. Games described in the 13th century Libro de los juegos: Doublets El Mundo Imperator Seven-sided backgammon Six, Deuce, and Ace Tabula, 2nd century Roman game. Ludus duodecim scriptorum, Roman game dating back to the 2nd century B.C. See also[edit] Mancala ('sowing' or seed games) Footnotes[edit] ^ Winning triple, that is by bearing off all the counters while the opponent has yet to bear any off and has still counters on the winner's home board or on the bar. ^ Winning double occurs when the player bears off all the counters while the opponent has yet to bear any off. References[edit] ^ Hayes, William C. "Egyptian Tomb Reliefs of the Old Kingdom", The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin, New Series 4:7. March 1946. pp 170-178. ^ "Iran's Burnt City Throws up World’s Oldest Backgammon." Persian Journal. December 4, 2004. Retrieved on August 5, 2006. ^ a b c d e f Austin, Roland G (1934). "Zeno's Game of ?????". The Journal of Hellenic Studies. 54 (2): 202–205. doi:10.2307/626864. JSTOR 626864. ^ a b Austin, Roland G. (February 1935). "Roman Board Games. II". Greece & Rome. 4 (11): 76–82. doi:10.1017/s0017383500003119. ^ Robert Charles Bell, Board and table games from many civilizations, Courier Dover Publications, 1979, ISBN 0-486-23855-5, pp. 33-35. ^ Jacoby, Oswald; Crawford, John R. (1970). The Backgammon Book. New York: Viking Press. p. 51. ISBN 0-670-14409-6. ^ Koukoules, Phaidon (1948). Vyzantinon Vios kai Politismos. 1. Collection de l'institut français d'Athènes. pp. 200–204. ^ Austin, Roland G. "Roman Board Games. I", Greece & Rome 4:10, October 1934. pp. 24-34. ^ Wilkinson, Charles K. "Chessmen and Chess", The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin. New Series 1:9, May 1943. pp. 271-279 ^ Lillich, Meredith Parsons. "The Tric-Trac Window of Le Mans", The Art Bulletin 65:1, March 1983. pp. 23-33. ^ Wollesen, Jens T. "Sub specie ludi...: Text and Images in Alfonso El Sabio's Libro de Acedrex, Dados e Tablas", Zeitschrift für Kunstgeschichte 53:3, 1990. pp. 277-308. ^ "table, n.", The Oxford English Dictionary. Second Edition, 1989. (Subscription required) ^ a b Parlett (1999), p. 86. ^ Soumille, Abbot (abbé) Bernard Laurent (1738). Le Grand Trictrac. Ou Méthode Facile pour Apprendre san Maître (in French). Avignon: Chez F.Girard & D. Seguin. p. 320NUC: Library of Congress, University of Chicago.CS1 maint: postscript (link) ^ Murray, H. J. R. (1978). A History of Board Games Other than Chess. Hacker Art Books. p. 279. ISBN 978-0-87817-211-5. ^ Ibid. ^ Le Jeu de Trictrac. Paris: Chez Henry Charpentier. 1701. p. 198ASIN: B004FKIFEY.CS1 maint: postscript (link) ^ Fiske (1905), p. 183. ^ Le jeu de Jacquet at salondesjeux.fr. Retrieved 29 October 2021. ^ Fallavel (1715), pp. 63–77. ^ "Tavli (Greek Backgammon)". Backgammon Galore. Retrieved on August 8, 2006. ^ Helmfrid, Sten, et al. The Game of Swedish Tables [PDF]. February 26, 2003. Retrieved on August 12, 2006. ^ "Vasamuseet — The Swedish-Tables Association" Archived 2006-05-18 at the Wayback Machine, The Vasa Museum. Retrieved on August 12, 2006. ^ "Tudor Games & Indoor Pastimes". ^ Tavla Literature[edit] Fallavel J.M. (1715). Le Jeu du trictrac, Enrichi De Figures Avec les Jeux du Revertier, du Toute-Table, du Tourne-Case, de Dames Rabattues, du Plain et du Toc. 3rd edn. Paris: Henry Charpentier. Fiske, Willard (1905). Chess in Iceland and Icelandic Literature: with historical notes on other table-games. Florence: Florentine Typographical Society. Parlett, David (1999). The Oxford History of Board Games. Oxford: OUP, pp. 75–76 and 86. ISBN 9780192129987 External links[edit] Variants on Backgammon Galore v t e Tables games Historical Irish Jacquet Laquet Lourche Ludus duodecim scriptorum Royal Game of Ur Senet Tabula Tourne Case Trictrac Modern Acey-deucey Gul bara Plakoto Ssangryuk Sugoroku Tapa Backgammon Notation Opening Chouette FIBS Rollouts Categories Backgammon Tables Players Glossary Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tables_game&oldid=1056086313" Categories: Tables games Traditional board games Sport in Iran Hidden categories: CS1 maint: postscript CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2011 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages ??????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) Català Deutsch ???????? Français ???? Român? ??????? Svenska ?????????? Vepsän kel’ Edit links This page was last edited on 19 November 2021, at 17:15 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement