https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timur%27s_invasions_of_Georgia Timur's invasions of Georgia - Wikipedia Timur's invasions of Georgia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search 1386–1403 Turco-Mongol invasions Timur's invasions of Georgia Part of the Timurid Wars, Tokhtamysh–Timur war Georgian Kingdom during the invasions Date 1386–1403 Location Caucasus, eastern Anatolia, western Iran Result Inconclusive Kingdom of Georgia becomes tributary of Timurid Empire but remains mostly independent, and Christian. Belligerents Timurid Empire Kingdom of Georgia Commanders and leaders Timur King Bagrat V Casualties and losses unknown Large part of Georgia destroyed Tens of thousands civilians massacred At least 60,000 enslaved[1] v t e Timurid conquests and invasions Central Asia Balkh Persia Isfahan Tokhtamysh–Timur war Kondurcha River Caucasus Tbilisi; Birtvisi India Delhi Levant Aleppo; Damascus Anatolia Ankara; Smyrna Georgia, a Christian kingdom in the Caucasus, was subjected, between 1386 and 1403, to several disastrous invasions by the armies of Turco-Mongol conqueror Timur, whose vast empire stretched, at its greatest extent, from Central Asia into Anatolia. These conflicts were intimately linked with the wars between Timur (Tamerlane) and Tokhtamysh, the last khan of the Golden Horde and Timur's major rival for control over the Islamic world. Timur officially proclaimed his invasions to be jihad against the region's non-Muslims. Although he was able to invade parts of Georgia, he was never able to make the country Muslim and even recognized Georgia as a Christian state. In the first of eight invasions, Timur sacked Georgia's capital, Tbilisi, and captured the king Bagrat V in 1386. Georgian resistance prompted a renewed attack by the Turco-Mongol armies. Bagrat's son and successor, George VII, put up a stiff resistance and had to spend much of his reign (1395–1405) fighting the Timurid invasions. Timur personally led most of these raids to subdue the recalcitrant Georgian monarch. He was not able to establish a firm control over Georgia. By the time George VII was forced to accept Timur's terms of peace and agree to pay tribute, he was a master of little more than "gutted towns, ravaged countryside and a shattered monarchy."[2] History[edit] Timur orders the campaign against Georgia Timur's first appearance in the Caucasus was a response to Khan Tokhtamysh's marauding inroad into Northern Iran through the Caucasian lands in 1385. This marked an outbreak of outright hostility between the two Islamic monarchs. Timur responded by launching a full-scale invasion of the small frontier countries, which lay between the western border of his emerging empire and Tokhtamysh's khanate. After having overrun Azerbaijan and Kars, Timur marched into Georgia. The official history of his reign, Zafarnama, represents this campaign in Georgia as a jihad. Timur set out from Kars and assailed Samtskhe, the southernmost principality within the Kingdom of Georgia later in 1386. From there, he marched against Tbilisi which the Georgian king Bagrat V had fortified. The city fell on November 21, 1386, and King Bagrat V was captured and converted to Islam at sword point. The Georgian Chronicle and Thomas of Metsoph mention the apostasy of the king but represent it as a clever ruse which enabled him to earn a degree of Timur's trust. Bagrat was given some 12,000 troops to reestablish himself in Georgia, whose government was run by Bagrat's son and co-ruler George VII during his father's absence at Timur's court. The old king, however, entered into secret negotiations with George, who ambushed Bagrat's Islamic escort, and freed his father.[1] In the spring of 1387, Timur returned to Georgia to take revenge for the ambush and escape. Bagrat and George managed to evacuate the civilian population of the frontier regions to the mountains and forests, and began organising their defences. Khan Tokhtamysh's reappearance in Iran forced Timur to temporarily withdraw. However once the Golden Horde was defeated, Timur returned to attack Georgia again. In 1394, he dispatched four generals to the province of Samtskhe, with orders to apply the Islamic law of ghaza (i.e. the systematic raiding of non-Muslim lands). The same year, Timur in person punished the mountainous Georgian communities in the Aragvi Valley whom the Zafarnama calls Kara-Kalkanlik ("with black bucklers”, i.e., the eastern Georgian mountaineers, the Pshavs and Khevsurs), and returned via Tbilisi to Shekki upon hearing of yet another offensive by Tokhtamysh.[1] In 1395 the desperate Georgians allied themselves with Sidi Ali of Shekki and inflicted a crushing defeat on the invading armies of Miran Shah, a son of Timur, who was besieging Alindjak (near Nakhichevan), and captured the Jalayirid prince Tahir, who was shut up in it. This event prompted Timur to return, later in 1399, to inflict massive revenge on the general population of the region. He took Shekki and devastated the neighboring region of Kakheti.[1] The Mongol dominions, 1300–1405; the Timurid Empire is shaded. The Caucasus, c. 1378–1502. In the spring of 1400, Timur moved back to destroy the Georgian state once and for all. He demanded that George VII should hand over the Jalayirid Tahir. George VII refused and met Timur at the Sagim River in Lower Kartli, but suffered a defeat and retreated deeper into the country, relentlessly chased by Timur. Timur destroyed the Georgian capital Tbilisi, left a garrison there, and laid siege to Gori, where George was entrenched. The king made a bold sortie westward, but having failed to thwart the enemy's advance at the fortresses of Dzami and Savaneti, fled to the inaccessible forests of western Georgia, where the armies of the Islamic ruler could not penetrate. Timur turned back in fury and thoroughly pillaged the rest of Georgia. This bloody campaign lasted for several months, with Timur's armies systematically moving from province to province. Virtually all major cities and towns were destroyed and their populations decimated; the countryside (with its villages and food sources) was burnt; monasteries and churches were systematically razed to the ground. Of those who survived the fighting and reprisals, many thousands died of hunger and disease, and 60,000 survivors were enslaved and carried away by Timur's troops.[1] In late 1401, Timur invaded the Caucasus once again. George VII had to sue for peace, and sent his brother with tribute. Timur was preparing for a major confrontation with the Ottoman dynasty and apparently wished to freeze the currently prevailing situation in Georgia, until he could return to deal with it more decisively and thoroughly at his leisure. Thus, he made peace with George on condition that the king of Georgia supplied him with troops and granted Muslims special privileges.[3] Timur nonetheless undertook some preventive measures and attacked the Georgian garrison of Tortumi, demolishing the citadel and looting the surrounding area.[1] Once the Ottomans were defeated, Timur, back in Erzurum in 1402, decided to punish the king of Georgia for not having come to present his congratulations on his victory. George VII's brother, Constantine, who was then on bad terms with his brother, arrived with gifts, as did the king's defiant vassal Iwane Jaqeli, prince of Samtskhe. Sheikh Ibrahim I of Shirvan went to estimate the revenues and expenses of Georgia. George sent new presents but Timur refused them and summoned George to appear in person. In the meantime, he himself laid siege to the previously impregnable fortress of Birtvisi, stubbornly defended by a tiny Georgian garrison. Having captured the fortress in August 1403, Timur sent his army to plunder and clear the frontier regions of Georgia and set out in pursuit of the retreating king George VII as far as Abkhazia. Timur's historian reports that 700 towns were destroyed and their inhabitants massacred.[1][4] Timur only stopped his army when the ulema and the mufti decided it was possible to grant the king of Georgia clemency (aman). George VII had to pay a huge tribute, including 1,000 tankas of gold struck in the name of Timur, 1,000 horses, a ruby weighing 18 mithkals, etc. Timur then passed through Tbilisi, destroying all monasteries and churches on his way, and went to Beylagan early in 1404. All the territories from Beylagan to Trebizond were officially given by Timur as an appanage to his grandson Khalil Mirza.[1] Timur then finally left the Caucasus and headed for Central Asia, where he died on February 19, 1405, while preparing for a massive invasion of China.[citation needed] References[edit] ^ a b c d e f g h Minorsky, Vladimir, "Tiflis", in: M. Th. Houtsma, E. van Donzel (1993), E. J. Brill's First Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1913–1936, p. 757. Brill, ISBN 90-04-08265-4. ^ Suny, Ronald Grigor (1994), The Making of the Georgian Nation, p. 45. Indiana University Press, ISBN 0-253-20915-3 ^ Sicker, Martin (2000), The Islamic World in Ascendancy: From the Arab Conquests to the Siege of Vienna, p. 155. Praeger, ISBN 0-275-96892-8. ^ Grousset, René (1970), The Empire of the Steppes: A History of Central Asia, pp. 433–4. Rutgers University Press, ISBN 0-8135-1304-9. v t e Invasions of Georgia Scytho-Cimmerian invasions of the Caucasus Georgian campaign of Pompey Sasanian invasion of 526–532 Sasanian invasion of 541–562 Turkic-Byzantine invasion Marwan ibn Muhammad's invasion Sajid invasion Byzantine invasion Great Turkish Invasion Mongol invasions Azat Mousa's invasion Timur's invasions Turkoman invasions Shah Tahmasp I's invasions of Georgia Ottoman invasion of 1578 Shah Abbas I's invasions of Georgia Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar's sack of Tbilisi Red Army invasion of Georgia Russian intervention of 2008 v t e Georgia articles History Early Prehistoric Georgia Shulaveri-Shomu culture Kura–Araxes culture Trialeti culture Colchian culture Mushki Diauehi Colchis Iberia Lazica Roman era Sasanian Iberia Christianization of Iberia Middle Principality of Iberia Bagrationi dynasty Arab rule Emirate of Tbilisi Kingdom of Abkhazia Bagratid Iberia Kingdom of Hereti First Kingdom of Kakheti Kingdom of Georgia Byzantine wars Seljuk wars Battle of Didgori Golden Age Mongol invasions Timur's invasions Samtskhe atabegate Turkmen incursions Kingdom of Imereti Principality of Abkhazia Principality of Svaneti Principality of Guria Principality of Mingrelia Kingdom of Kartli Kingdom of Kakheti Safavid Georgia Shah Abbas I's invasions Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti 1795 Persian Invasion Absorption by the Russian Empire Modern Democratic Republic of Georgia Armenian War Red Army invasion Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic April 9 tragedy Independent Georgia Civil War War in Abkhazia Rose Revolution Russo-Georgian War By topic Name of Georgia Monarchs States Military history Wars Battles Timeline of Georgian history more Geography Borders Birds Black Sea Climate Earthquakes Environmental issues Glaciers Greater Caucasus Lakes Lesser Caucasus Mammals National parks Protected areas Rivers Volcanoes more Subdivisions Administrative divisions Cities and towns Tbilisi Regions more Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT Law enforcement Military Parliament Political parties President Prime Minister Economy Agriculture Central bank Companies Energy Lari (currency) Mining Stock Exchange Telecommunications Tourism Transport more Culture Alphabet Architecture Art Chokha Cinema Cuisine Wine Dance Languages Georgian Laz Mingrelian Svan Media Music Mythology Names Public holidays Religion Sports World Heritage sites more Demographics Education Ethnic minorities Georgians List Diaspora Health care Women more Symbols Anthem Bolnisi cross Borjgali Coat of arms Flag Motto Saint George cross Saint Nino cross Outline Index Category Portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timur%27s_invasions_of_Georgia&oldid=1056378259" Categories: Wars involving the Kingdom of Georgia Invasions of Georgia (country) Invasions by the Mongol Empire Spread of Islam Religion-based wars Military history of Islam Islam and violence Invasions Battles of Timur 1380s conflicts 1390s conflicts 1400s conflicts 14th century in the Kingdom of Georgia 15th century in the Kingdom of Georgia 1380s in Asia 1390s in Asia 1400s in Asia 1400s in Europe Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Az?rbaycanca Español Esperanto Hrvatski ????? ??????? O?zbekcha/??????? ??????? Suomi Türkçe Edit links This page was last edited on 21 November 2021, at 12:32 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timur%27s_invasions_of_Georgia Timur's invasions of Georgia - Wikipedia Timur's invasions of Georgia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search 1386–1403 Turco-Mongol invasions Timur's invasions of Georgia Part of the Timurid Wars, Tokhtamysh–Timur war Georgian Kingdom during the invasions Date 1386–1403 Location Caucasus, eastern Anatolia, western Iran Result Inconclusive Kingdom of Georgia becomes tributary of Timurid Empire but remains mostly independent, and Christian. Belligerents Timurid Empire Kingdom of Georgia Commanders and leaders Timur King Bagrat V Casualties and losses unknown Large part of Georgia destroyed Tens of thousands civilians massacred At least 60,000 enslaved[1] v t e Timurid conquests and invasions Central Asia Balkh Persia Isfahan Tokhtamysh–Timur war Kondurcha River Caucasus Tbilisi; Birtvisi India Delhi Levant Aleppo; Damascus Anatolia Ankara; Smyrna Georgia, a Christian kingdom in the Caucasus, was subjected, between 1386 and 1403, to several disastrous invasions by the armies of Turco-Mongol conqueror Timur, whose vast empire stretched, at its greatest extent, from Central Asia into Anatolia. These conflicts were intimately linked with the wars between Timur (Tamerlane) and Tokhtamysh, the last khan of the Golden Horde and Timur's major rival for control over the Islamic world. Timur officially proclaimed his invasions to be jihad against the region's non-Muslims. Although he was able to invade parts of Georgia, he was never able to make the country Muslim and even recognized Georgia as a Christian state. In the first of eight invasions, Timur sacked Georgia's capital, Tbilisi, and captured the king Bagrat V in 1386. Georgian resistance prompted a renewed attack by the Turco-Mongol armies. Bagrat's son and successor, George VII, put up a stiff resistance and had to spend much of his reign (1395–1405) fighting the Timurid invasions. Timur personally led most of these raids to subdue the recalcitrant Georgian monarch. He was not able to establish a firm control over Georgia. By the time George VII was forced to accept Timur's terms of peace and agree to pay tribute, he was a master of little more than "gutted towns, ravaged countryside and a shattered monarchy."[2] History[edit] Timur orders the campaign against Georgia Timur's first appearance in the Caucasus was a response to Khan Tokhtamysh's marauding inroad into Northern Iran through the Caucasian lands in 1385. This marked an outbreak of outright hostility between the two Islamic monarchs. Timur responded by launching a full-scale invasion of the small frontier countries, which lay between the western border of his emerging empire and Tokhtamysh's khanate. After having overrun Azerbaijan and Kars, Timur marched into Georgia. The official history of his reign, Zafarnama, represents this campaign in Georgia as a jihad. Timur set out from Kars and assailed Samtskhe, the southernmost principality within the Kingdom of Georgia later in 1386. From there, he marched against Tbilisi which the Georgian king Bagrat V had fortified. The city fell on November 21, 1386, and King Bagrat V was captured and converted to Islam at sword point. The Georgian Chronicle and Thomas of Metsoph mention the apostasy of the king but represent it as a clever ruse which enabled him to earn a degree of Timur's trust. Bagrat was given some 12,000 troops to reestablish himself in Georgia, whose government was run by Bagrat's son and co-ruler George VII during his father's absence at Timur's court. The old king, however, entered into secret negotiations with George, who ambushed Bagrat's Islamic escort, and freed his father.[1] In the spring of 1387, Timur returned to Georgia to take revenge for the ambush and escape. Bagrat and George managed to evacuate the civilian population of the frontier regions to the mountains and forests, and began organising their defences. Khan Tokhtamysh's reappearance in Iran forced Timur to temporarily withdraw. However once the Golden Horde was defeated, Timur returned to attack Georgia again. In 1394, he dispatched four generals to the province of Samtskhe, with orders to apply the Islamic law of ghaza (i.e. the systematic raiding of non-Muslim lands). The same year, Timur in person punished the mountainous Georgian communities in the Aragvi Valley whom the Zafarnama calls Kara-Kalkanlik ("with black bucklers”, i.e., the eastern Georgian mountaineers, the Pshavs and Khevsurs), and returned via Tbilisi to Shekki upon hearing of yet another offensive by Tokhtamysh.[1] In 1395 the desperate Georgians allied themselves with Sidi Ali of Shekki and inflicted a crushing defeat on the invading armies of Miran Shah, a son of Timur, who was besieging Alindjak (near Nakhichevan), and captured the Jalayirid prince Tahir, who was shut up in it. This event prompted Timur to return, later in 1399, to inflict massive revenge on the general population of the region. He took Shekki and devastated the neighboring region of Kakheti.[1] The Mongol dominions, 1300–1405; the Timurid Empire is shaded. The Caucasus, c. 1378–1502. In the spring of 1400, Timur moved back to destroy the Georgian state once and for all. He demanded that George VII should hand over the Jalayirid Tahir. George VII refused and met Timur at the Sagim River in Lower Kartli, but suffered a defeat and retreated deeper into the country, relentlessly chased by Timur. Timur destroyed the Georgian capital Tbilisi, left a garrison there, and laid siege to Gori, where George was entrenched. The king made a bold sortie westward, but having failed to thwart the enemy's advance at the fortresses of Dzami and Savaneti, fled to the inaccessible forests of western Georgia, where the armies of the Islamic ruler could not penetrate. Timur turned back in fury and thoroughly pillaged the rest of Georgia. This bloody campaign lasted for several months, with Timur's armies systematically moving from province to province. Virtually all major cities and towns were destroyed and their populations decimated; the countryside (with its villages and food sources) was burnt; monasteries and churches were systematically razed to the ground. Of those who survived the fighting and reprisals, many thousands died of hunger and disease, and 60,000 survivors were enslaved and carried away by Timur's troops.[1] In late 1401, Timur invaded the Caucasus once again. George VII had to sue for peace, and sent his brother with tribute. Timur was preparing for a major confrontation with the Ottoman dynasty and apparently wished to freeze the currently prevailing situation in Georgia, until he could return to deal with it more decisively and thoroughly at his leisure. Thus, he made peace with George on condition that the king of Georgia supplied him with troops and granted Muslims special privileges.[3] Timur nonetheless undertook some preventive measures and attacked the Georgian garrison of Tortumi, demolishing the citadel and looting the surrounding area.[1] Once the Ottomans were defeated, Timur, back in Erzurum in 1402, decided to punish the king of Georgia for not having come to present his congratulations on his victory. George VII's brother, Constantine, who was then on bad terms with his brother, arrived with gifts, as did the king's defiant vassal Iwane Jaqeli, prince of Samtskhe. Sheikh Ibrahim I of Shirvan went to estimate the revenues and expenses of Georgia. George sent new presents but Timur refused them and summoned George to appear in person. In the meantime, he himself laid siege to the previously impregnable fortress of Birtvisi, stubbornly defended by a tiny Georgian garrison. Having captured the fortress in August 1403, Timur sent his army to plunder and clear the frontier regions of Georgia and set out in pursuit of the retreating king George VII as far as Abkhazia. Timur's historian reports that 700 towns were destroyed and their inhabitants massacred.[1][4] Timur only stopped his army when the ulema and the mufti decided it was possible to grant the king of Georgia clemency (aman). George VII had to pay a huge tribute, including 1,000 tankas of gold struck in the name of Timur, 1,000 horses, a ruby weighing 18 mithkals, etc. Timur then passed through Tbilisi, destroying all monasteries and churches on his way, and went to Beylagan early in 1404. All the territories from Beylagan to Trebizond were officially given by Timur as an appanage to his grandson Khalil Mirza.[1] Timur then finally left the Caucasus and headed for Central Asia, where he died on February 19, 1405, while preparing for a massive invasion of China.[citation needed] References[edit] ^ a b c d e f g h Minorsky, Vladimir, "Tiflis", in: M. Th. Houtsma, E. van Donzel (1993), E. J. Brill's First Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1913–1936, p. 757. Brill, ISBN 90-04-08265-4. ^ Suny, Ronald Grigor (1994), The Making of the Georgian Nation, p. 45. Indiana University Press, ISBN 0-253-20915-3 ^ Sicker, Martin (2000), The Islamic World in Ascendancy: From the Arab Conquests to the Siege of Vienna, p. 155. Praeger, ISBN 0-275-96892-8. ^ Grousset, René (1970), The Empire of the Steppes: A History of Central Asia, pp. 433–4. Rutgers University Press, ISBN 0-8135-1304-9. v t e Invasions of Georgia Scytho-Cimmerian invasions of the Caucasus Georgian campaign of Pompey Sasanian invasion of 526–532 Sasanian invasion of 541–562 Turkic-Byzantine invasion Marwan ibn Muhammad's invasion Sajid invasion Byzantine invasion Great Turkish Invasion Mongol invasions Azat Mousa's invasion Timur's invasions Turkoman invasions Shah Tahmasp I's invasions of Georgia Ottoman invasion of 1578 Shah Abbas I's invasions of Georgia Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar's sack of Tbilisi Red Army invasion of Georgia Russian intervention of 2008 v t e Georgia articles History Early Prehistoric Georgia Shulaveri-Shomu culture Kura–Araxes culture Trialeti culture Colchian culture Mushki Diauehi Colchis Iberia Lazica Roman era Sasanian Iberia Christianization of Iberia Middle Principality of Iberia Bagrationi dynasty Arab rule Emirate of Tbilisi Kingdom of Abkhazia Bagratid Iberia Kingdom of Hereti First Kingdom of Kakheti Kingdom of Georgia Byzantine wars Seljuk wars Battle of Didgori Golden Age Mongol invasions Timur's invasions Samtskhe atabegate Turkmen incursions Kingdom of Imereti Principality of Abkhazia Principality of Svaneti Principality of Guria Principality of Mingrelia Kingdom of Kartli Kingdom of Kakheti Safavid Georgia Shah Abbas I's invasions Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti 1795 Persian Invasion Absorption by the Russian Empire Modern Democratic Republic of Georgia Armenian War Red Army invasion Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic April 9 tragedy Independent Georgia Civil War War in Abkhazia Rose Revolution Russo-Georgian War By topic Name of Georgia Monarchs States Military history Wars Battles Timeline of Georgian history more Geography Borders Birds Black Sea Climate Earthquakes Environmental issues Glaciers Greater Caucasus Lakes Lesser Caucasus Mammals National parks Protected areas Rivers Volcanoes more Subdivisions Administrative divisions Cities and towns Tbilisi Regions more Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT Law enforcement Military Parliament Political parties President Prime Minister Economy Agriculture Central bank Companies Energy Lari (currency) Mining Stock Exchange Telecommunications Tourism Transport more Culture Alphabet Architecture Art Chokha Cinema Cuisine Wine Dance Languages Georgian Laz Mingrelian Svan Media Music Mythology Names Public holidays Religion Sports World Heritage sites more Demographics Education Ethnic minorities Georgians List Diaspora Health care Women more Symbols Anthem Bolnisi cross Borjgali Coat of arms Flag Motto Saint George cross Saint Nino cross Outline Index Category Portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timur%27s_invasions_of_Georgia&oldid=1056378259" Categories: Wars involving the Kingdom of Georgia Invasions of Georgia (country) Invasions by the Mongol Empire Spread of Islam Religion-based wars Military history of Islam Islam and violence Invasions Battles of Timur 1380s conflicts 1390s conflicts 1400s conflicts 14th century in the Kingdom of Georgia 15th century in the Kingdom of Georgia 1380s in Asia 1390s in Asia 1400s in Asia 1400s in Europe Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Az?rbaycanca Español Esperanto Hrvatski ????? ??????? O?zbekcha/??????? ??????? Suomi Türkçe Edit links This page was last edited on 21 November 2021, at 12:32 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement