https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timur Timur - Wikipedia Timur From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search 14th-century Turco-Mongol military leader and conqueror; founder of the Timurid Empire Not to be confused with Timor. "Tamerlane" and "Tamerlan" redirect here. For the poem, see Tamerlane (poem). For people named Tamerlan, see Tamerlan (given name). For other uses, see Timur (disambiguation). Timur Beg Sultan[1] Timur facial reconstruction from skull, by Mikhail Mikhaylovich Gerasimov Amir of the Timurid Empire Reign 9 April 1370 – 14 February 1405 Coronation 9 April 1370, Balkh[2] Predecessor Amir Hussain (as the ruler of Transoxiana) Successor Khalil Sultan Born 9 April 1336[2] Kesh, Chagatai Khanate (now Shahrisabz, Uzbekistan) Died 18 February 1405(1405-02-18) (aged 68) Farab, Timurid Empire (now Otrar, Kazakhstan) Burial Gur-e-Amir, Samarkand, Uzbekistan Consort Saray Mulk Khanum Wives Chulpan Mulk Agha Aljaz Turkhan Agha Tukal Khanum Dil Shad Agha Touman Agha Other wives Issue Detail Umar Shaikh Mirza I Jahangir Mirza Miran Shah Shah Rukh Mirza Names Shuja-ud-din Timur[3] Dynasty Timurid Father Amir Taraghai Mother Tekina Khatun Religion Sunni Islam v t e Timurid conquests and invasions Central Asia Balkh Persia Isfahan Tokhtamysh–Timur war Kondurcha River Caucasus Tbilisi; Birtvisi India Delhi Levant Aleppo; Damascus Anatolia Ankara; Smyrna Timur[a] (Chagatay: ????? Temür, lit. 'Iron'; 9 April 1336 – 17–19 February 1405), later Tim?r Gurk?n?[b] (Chagatay: ????? ????? Temür Küregen),[8] was a Turco-Mongol conqueror who founded the Timurid Empire in and around modern-day Afghanistan, Iran and Central Asia, becoming the first ruler of the Timurid dynasty. As an undefeated commander, he is widely regarded as one of the greatest military leaders and tacticians in history.[9][10] Timur is also considered a great patron of art and architecture as he interacted with intellectuals such as Ibn Khaldun and Hafiz-i Abru and his reign introduced the Timurid Renaissance.[9]:?341–2? Born into the Barlas confederation in Transoxiana (in modern-day Uzbekistan) on 9 April 1336, Timur gained control of the western Chagatai Khanate by 1370. From that base, he led military campaigns across Western, South and Central Asia, the Caucasus, and Southern Russia, and emerged as the most powerful ruler in the Muslim world after defeating Golden Horde, the Mamluks of Egypt and Syria, the emerging Ottoman Empire, and the declining Delhi Sultanate of India.[11] From these conquests, he founded the Timurid Empire, but this empire fragmented shortly after his death. Timur was the last of the great nomadic conquerors of the Eurasian Steppe, and his empire set the stage for the rise of the more structured and lasting Islamic gunpowder empires in the 16th and 17th centuries.[12][13][14] Timur was of both Turkic and Mongol descent, and, while unlikely a direct descendant on either side, he shared a common ancestor with Genghis Khan on his father's side,[15][16][17] while other authors have suggested that his mother might have been a descendant of Khan.[18][19] He clearly sought to invoke the legacy of the latter's conquests during his lifetime.[20] Timur envisioned the restoration of the Mongol Empire of Genghis Khan (died 1227) and according to Gérard Chaliand, saw himself as Genghis Khan's heir.[21] According to Beatrice Forbes Manz, "in his formal correspondence Temur continued throughout his life to portray himself as the restorer of Chinggisid rights. He justified his Iranian, Mamluk, and Ottoman campaigns as a re-imposition of legitimate Mongol control over lands taken by usurpers."[22] To legitimize his conquests, Timur relied on Islamic symbols and language, referred to himself as the "Sword of Islam". He was a patron of educational and religious institutions. He converted nearly all the Borjigin leaders to Islam during his lifetime. Timur decisively defeated the Christian Knights Hospitaller at the Siege of Smyrna, styling himself a ghazi.[9]:?91? By the end of his reign, Timur had gained complete control over all the remnants of the Chagatai Khanate, the Ilkhanate, and the Golden Horde, and even attempted to restore the Yuan dynasty in China. Timur's armies were inclusively multi-ethnic and were feared throughout Asia, Africa, and Europe,[9] sizable parts of which his campaigns laid waste.[23] Scholars estimate that his military campaigns caused the deaths of 17 million people, amounting to about 5% of the world population at the time.[24][25] Of all the areas he conquered, Khwarazm suffered the most from his expeditions, as it rose several times against him.[26] Timur was the grandfather of the Timurid sultan, astronomer and mathematician Ulugh Beg, who ruled Central Asia from 1411 to 1449, and the great-great-great-grandfather of Babur (1483–1530), founder of the Mughal Empire, which then ruled almost all of the Indian subcontinent.[27][28] Contents 1 Ancestry 2 Early life 3 Military leader 4 Rise to power 5 Legitimization of Timur's rule 6 Period of expansion 7 Conquest of Persia 7.1 Tokhtamysh–Timur war 7.2 Ismailis 8 Campaign against the Tughlaq dynasty 8.1 Capture of Delhi (1398) 9 Campaigns in the Levant 10 Invasion of Anatolia 11 Attempts to attack the Ming dynasty 12 Death 13 Succession 14 Wives and concubines 15 Descendants 15.1 Sons of Timur 15.2 Daughters of Timur 15.3 Sons of Umar Shaikh Mirza I 15.4 Sons of Jahangir 15.5 Sons of Miran Shah 15.6 Sons of Shah Rukh Mirza 16 Religious views 17 Personality 18 Exchanges with Europe 19 Legacy 19.1 Historical sources 19.1.1 Malfuzat-i Timuri 19.2 European views 19.3 Exhumation and alleged curse 19.4 In the arts 20 Examples of Timurid architecture 21 See also 22 Notes 23 References 24 Further reading 25 External links Ancestry Genealogical relationship between Timur and Genghis Khan Through his father, Timur claimed to be a descendant of Tumanay Khan, a male-line ancestor he shared with Genghis Khan.[17] Tumanay's great-great grandson Qarachar Noyan was a minister for the emperor who later assisted the latter's son Chagatai in the governorship of Transoxiana.[29][30] Though there are not many mentions of Qarachar in 13th and 14th century records, later Timurid sources greatly emphasised his role in the early history of the Mongol Empire.[31][32] These histories also state that Genghis Khan later established the "bond of fatherhood and sonship" by marrying Chagatai's daughter to Qarachar.[33] Through his alleged descent from this marriage, Timur claimed kinship with the Chagatai Khans.[34] The origins of Timur's mother, Tekina Khatun, are less clear. The Zafarnama merely states her name without giving any information regarding her background. Writing in 1403, Johannes de Galonifontibus, Archbishop of Sultaniyya, claimed that she was of lowly origin.[29] The Mu'izz al-Ansab, written decades later, says that she was related to the Yasa'uri tribe, whose lands bordered that of the Barlas.[35] Ibn Khaldun recounted that Timur himself described to him his mother's descent from the legendary Persian hero Manuchehr.[36] Ibn Arabshah suggested that she was a descendant of Genghis Khan.[19] The 18th century Books of Timur identify her as the daughter of 'Sadr al-Sharia', which is believed to refer to the Hanafi scholar Ubayd Allah al-Mahbubi of Bukhara.[37] Early life Emir Timur feasts in the gardens of Samarkand. Timur was born in Transoxiana near the city of Kesh (modern Shahrisabz, Uzbekistan), some 80 kilometres (50 mi) south of Samarkand, part of what was then the Chagatai Khanate.[38] His name Temur means "Iron" in the Chagatai language, his mother-tongue (cf. Uzbek Temir, Turkish Demir).[39] It is cognate with Genghis Khan's birth name of Temüjin.[40][41] Later Timurid dynastic histories claim that Timur was born on 8 April 1336, but most sources from his lifetime give ages that are consistent with a birthdate in the late 1320s. Historian Beatrice Forbes Manz suspects the 1336 date was designed to tie Timur to the legacy of Abu Sa'id Bahadur Khan, the last ruler of the Ilkhanate descended from Hulagu Khan, who died in that year.[42] He was a member of the Barlas, a Mongolian tribe[43][44] that had been turkified in many aspects.[45][46][47] His father, Taraghai was described as a minor noble of this tribe.[38] However, Manz believes that Timur may have later understated the social position of his father, so as to make his own successes appear more remarkable. She states that though he is not believed to have been especially powerful, Taraghai was reasonably wealthy and influential.[48] This is shown by Timur later returning to his birthplace following the death of his father in 1360, suggesting concern over his estate.[49] Taraghai's social significance is further hinted at by Arabshah, who described him as a magnate in the court of Amir Husayn Qara'unas.[19] In addition to this, the father of the great Amir Hamid Kereyid of Moghulistan is stated as a friend of Taraghai's.[50] In his childhood, Timur and a small band of followers raided travelers for goods, especially animals such as sheep, horses, and cattle.[42]:?116? Around 1363, it is believed that Timur tried to steal a sheep from a shepherd but was shot by two arrows, one in his right leg and another in his right hand, where he lost two fingers. Both injuries crippled him for life. Some believe that Timur suffered his crippling injuries while serving as a mercenary to the khan of Sistan in Khorasan in what is today the Dashti Margo in southwest Afghanistan. Timur's injuries have given him the names of Timur the Lame and Tamerlane by Europeans.[9]:?31? Military leader About 1360, Timur gained prominence as a military leader whose troops were mostly Turkic tribesmen of the region.[21] He took part in campaigns in Transoxiana with the Khan of the Chagatai Khanate. Allying himself both in cause and by family connection with Qazaghan, the dethroner and destroyer of Volga Bulgaria, he invaded Khorasan[51] at the head of a thousand horsemen. This was the second military expedition that he led, and its success led to further operations, among them the subjugation of Khwarezm and Urgench.[52] Following Qazaghan's murder, disputes arose among the many claimants to sovereign power. Tughlugh Timur of Kashgar, the Khan of the Eastern Chagatai Khanate, another descendant of Genghis Khan, invaded, interrupting this infighting. Timur was sent to negotiate with the invader but joined with him instead and was rewarded with Transoxania. At about this time, his father died and Timur also became chief of the Berlas. Tughlugh then attempted to set his son Ilyas Khoja over Transoxania, but Timur repelled this invasion with a smaller force.[51] Rise to power Timur commanding the Siege of Balkh It was in this period that Timur reduced the Chagatai khans to the position of figureheads while he ruled in their name. Also during this period, Timur and his brother-in-law Amir Husayn, who were at first fellow fugitives and wanderers, became rivals and antagonists.[52] The relationship between them became strained after Husayn abandoned efforts to carry out Timur's orders to finish off Ilya Khoja (former governor of Mawarannah) close to Tashkent.[9]:?40? Timur gained followers in Balkh, consisting of merchants, fellow tribesmen, Muslim clergy, aristocracy and agricultural workers, because of his kindness in sharing his belongings with them. This contrasted Timur's behavior with that of Husayn, who alienated these people, took many possessions from them via his heavy tax laws and selfishly spent the tax money building elaborate structures.[9]:?41–2? Around 1370, Husayn surrendered to Timur and was later assassinated, which allowed Timur to be formally proclaimed sovereign at Balkh. He married Husayn's wife Saray Mulk Khanum, a descendant of Genghis Khan, allowing him to become imperial ruler of the Chaghatay tribe.[9] Legitimization of Timur's rule Timur's Turco-Mongolian heritage provided opportunities and challenges as he sought to rule the Mongol Empire and the Muslim world. According to the Mongol traditions, Timur could not claim the title of khan or rule the Mongol Empire because he was not a descendant of Genghis Khan. Therefore, Timur set up a puppet Chaghatay Khan, Suyurghatmish, as the nominal ruler of Balkh as he pretended to act as a "protector of the member of a Chinggisid line, that of Genghis Khan's eldest son, Jochi".[53] Timur instead used the title of Amir meaning general, and acting in the name of the Chagatai ruler of Transoxania.[42]:?106? To reinforce this position, Timur claimed the title Guregen (royal son-in-law) when he married Saray Mulk Khanum, a princess of Chinggisid descent.[7] As with the title of Khan, Timur similarly could not claim the supreme title of the Islamic world, Caliph, because the "office was limited to the Quraysh, the tribe of the Prophet Muhammad". Therefore, Timur reacted to the challenge by creating a myth and image of himself as a "supernatural personal power" ordained by God.[53] Otherwise he was described as a spiritual descendant of Ali, thus taken lineage of both to Genghis Khan and the Quraysh.[54] Period of expansion Timur besieges the historic city of Urganj. Timur spent the next 35 years in various wars and expeditions. He not only consolidated his rule at home by the subjugation of his foes, but sought extension of territory by encroachments upon the lands of foreign potentates. His conquests to the west and northwest led him to the lands near the Caspian Sea and to the banks of the Ural and the Volga. Conquests in the south and south-West encompassed almost every province in Persia, including Baghdad, Karbala and Northern Iraq.[52] One of the most formidable of Timur's opponents was another Mongol ruler, a descendant of Genghis Khan named Tokhtamysh. After having been a refugee in Timur's court, Tokhtamysh became ruler both of the eastern Kipchak and the Golden Horde. After his accession, he quarreled with Timur over the possession of Khwarizm and Azerbaijan.[52] However, Timur still supported him against the Russians and in 1382 Tokhtamysh invaded the Muscovite dominion and burned Moscow.[55] Orthodox tradition states that later, in 1395 Timur, having reached the frontier of Principality of Ryazan, had taken Elets and started advancing towards Moscow. Great Prince Vasily I of Moscow went with an army to Kolomna and halted at the banks of the Oka River. The clergy brought the famed Theotokos of Vladimir icon from Vladimir to Moscow. Along the way people prayed kneeling: "O Mother of God, save the land of Russia!" Suddenly, Timur's armies retreated. In memory of this miraculous deliverance of the Russian land from Timur on 26 August, the all-Russian celebration in honor of the Meeting of the Vladimir Icon of the Most Holy Mother of God was established.[56] Conquest of Persia Timur orders campaign against Georgia. Emir Timur's army attacks the survivors of the town of Nerges, in Georgia, in the spring of 1396. After the death of Abu Sa'id, ruler of the Ilkhanate, in 1335, there was a power vacuum in Persia. In the end, Persia was split amongst the Muzaffarids, Kartids, Eretnids, Chobanids, Injuids, Jalayirids, and Sarbadars. In 1383, Timur started his lengthy military conquest of Persia, though he already ruled over much of Persian Khorasan by 1381, after Khwaja Mas'ud, of the Sarbadar dynasty surrendered. Timur began his Persian campaign with Herat, capital of the Kartid dynasty. When Herat did not surrender he reduced the city to rubble and massacred most of its citizens; it remained in ruins until Shah Rukh ordered its reconstruction around 1415.[57] Timur then sent a General to capture rebellious Kandahar. With the capture of Herat the Kartid kingdom surrendered and became vassals of Timur; it would later be annexed outright less than a decade later in 1389 by Timur's son Miran Shah.[58] Timur then headed west to capture the Zagros Mountains, passing through Mazandaran. During his travel through the north of Persia, he captured the then town of Tehran, which surrendered and was thus treated mercifully. He laid siege to Soltaniyeh in 1384. Khorasan revolted one year later, so Timur destroyed Isfizar, and the prisoners were cemented into the walls alive. The next year the kingdom of Sistan, under the Mihrabanid dynasty, was ravaged, and its capital at Zaranj was destroyed. Timur then returned to his capital of Samarkand, where he began planning for his Georgian campaign and Golden Horde invasion. In 1386, Timur passed through Mazandaran as he had when trying to capture the Zagros. He went near the city of Soltaniyeh, which he had previously captured but instead turned north and captured Tabriz with little resistance, along with Maragha.[59] He ordered heavy taxation of the people, which was collected by Adil Aqa, who was also given control over Soltaniyeh. Adil was later executed because Timur suspected him of corruption.[60] Timur then went north to begin his Georgian and Golden Horde campaigns, pausing his full-scale invasion of Persia. When he returned, he found his generals had done well in protecting the cities and lands he had conquered in Persia.[61] Though many rebelled, and his son Miran Shah, who may have been regent, was forced to annex rebellious vassal dynasties, his holdings remained. So he proceeded to capture the rest of Persia, specifically the two major southern cities of Isfahan and Shiraz. When he arrived with his army at Isfahan in 1387, the city immediately surrendered; he treated it with relative mercy as he normally did with cities that surrendered (unlike Herat).[62] However, after Isfahan revolted against Timur's taxes by killing the tax collectors and some of Timur's soldiers, he ordered the massacre of the city's citizens; the death toll is reckoned at between 100,000 and 200,000.[63] An eye-witness counted more than 28 towers constructed of about 1,500 heads each.[64] This has been described as a "systematic use of terror against towns...an integral element of Tamerlane's strategic element", which he viewed as preventing bloodshed by discouraging resistance. His massacres were selective and he spared the artistic and educated.[63] This would later influence the next great Persian conqueror: Nader Shah.[65] Timur then began a five-year campaign to the west in 1392, attacking Persian Kurdistan.[66][67][68] In 1393, Shiraz was captured after surrendering, and the Muzaffarids became vassals of Timur, though prince Shah Mansur rebelled but was defeated, and the Muzafarids were annexed. Shortly after Georgia was devastated so that the Golden Horde could not use it to threaten northern Iran.[69] In the same year, Timur caught Baghdad by surprise in August by marching there in only eight days from Shiraz. Sultan Ahmad Jalayir fled to Syria, where the Mamluk Sultan Barquq protected him and killed Timur's envoys. Timur left the Sarbadar prince Khwaja Mas'ud to govern Baghdad, but he was driven out when Ahmad Jalayir returned. Ahmad was unpopular but got help from Qara Yusuf of the Kara Koyunlu; he fled again in 1399, this time to the Ottomans.[70] Tokhtamysh–Timur war See also: Karsakpay inscription In the meantime, Tokhtamysh, now khan of the Golden Horde, turned against his patron and in 1385 invaded Azerbaijan. The inevitable response by Timur resulted in the Tokhtamysh–Timur war. In the initial stage of the war, Timur won a victory at the Battle of the Kondurcha River. After the battle Tokhtamysh and some of his army were allowed to escape. After Tokhtamysh's initial defeat, Timur invaded Muscovy to the north of Tokhtamysh's holdings. Timur's army burned Ryazan and advanced on Moscow. He was pulled away before reaching the Oka River by Tokhtamysh's renewed campaign in the south.[71] In the first phase of the conflict with Tokhtamysh, Timur led an army of over 100,000 men north for more than 700 miles into the steppe. He then rode west about 1,000 miles advancing in a front more than 10 miles wide. During this advance, Timur's army got far enough north to be in a region of very long summer days causing complaints by his Muslim soldiers about keeping a long schedule of prayers. It was then that Tokhtamysh's army was boxed in against the east bank of the Volga River in the Orenburg region and destroyed at the Battle of the Kondurcha River, in 1391. In the second phase of the conflict, Timur took a different route against the enemy by invading the realm of Tokhtamysh via the Caucasus region. In 1395, Timur defeated Tokhtamysh in the Battle of the Terek River, concluding the struggle between the two monarchs. Tokhtamysh was unable to restore his power or prestige, and he was killed about a decade later in the area of present-day Tyumen. During the course of Timur's campaigns, his army destroyed Sarai, the capital of the Golden Horde, and Astrakhan, subsequently disrupting the Golden Horde's Silk Road. The Golden Horde no longer held power after their losses to Timur. Ismailis In May 1393, Timur's army invaded the Anjudan, crippling the Ismaili village only a year after his assault on the Ismailis in Mazandaran. The village was prepared for the attack, evidenced by its fortress and system of tunnels. Undeterred, Timur's soldiers flooded the tunnels by cutting into a channel overhead. Timur's reasons for attacking this village are not yet well understood. However, it has been suggested that his religious persuasions and view of himself as an executor of divine will may have contributed to his motivations.[72] The Persian historian Khwandamir explains that an Ismaili presence was growing more politically powerful in Persian Iraq. A group of locals in the region was dissatisfied with this and, Khwandamir writes, these locals assembled and brought up their complaint with Timur, possibly provoking his attack on the Ismailis there.[72] Campaign against the Tughlaq dynasty Timur defeats the Sultan of Delhi, Nasir Al-Din Mahmud Tughluq, in the winter of 1397–1398, painting dated 1595–1600. In 1398, Timur invaded northern India, attacking the Delhi Sultanate ruled by Sultan Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq of the Tughlaq dynasty. After crossing the Indus River on 30 September 1398, he sacked Tulamba and massacred its inhabitants. Then he advanced and captured Multan by October.[73] His invasion was unopposed as most of the Indian nobility surrendered without a fight, however he did encounter resistance from the united army of Rajputs and Muslims at Bhatner[74] under the command of the Rajput king Dulachand,[75] Dulachand initially opposed Timur but when hard-pressed he considered surrender. He was locked outside the walls of Bhatner by his brother and was later killed by Timur. The garrison of Bhatner then fought and were slaughtered to the last man. Bhatner was looted and burned to the ground.[76] While on his march towards Delhi, Timur was opposed by the Jat peasantry, who would loot caravans and then disappear in the forests, Timur had 2,000 Jats killed and many taken captive.[76][77] But the Sultanate at Delhi did nothing to stop his advance.[78][unreliable source?] Capture of Delhi (1398) The battle took place on 17 December 1398. Sultan Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq and the army of Mallu Iqbal[79] had war elephants armored with chain mail and poison on their tusks.[9]:?267? As his Tatar forces were afraid of the elephants, Timur ordered his men to dig a trench in front of their positions. Timur then loaded his camels with as much wood and hay as they could carry. When the war elephants charged, Timur set the hay on fire and prodded the camels with iron sticks, causing them to charge at the elephants, howling in pain: Timur had understood that elephants were easily panicked. Faced with the strange spectacle of camels flying straight at them with flames leaping from their backs, the elephants turned around and stampeded back toward their own lines. Timur capitalized on the subsequent disruption in the forces of Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq, securing an easy victory. Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq fled with remnants of his forces. Delhi was sacked and left in ruins. Before the battle for Delhi, Timur executed 100,000 captives.[28] The capture of the Delhi Sultanate was one of Timur's greatest victories, as at that time, Delhi was one of the richest cities in the world. After Delhi fell to Timur's army, uprisings by its citizens against the Turkic-Mongols began to occur, causing a retaliatory bloody massacre within the city walls. After three days of citizens uprising within Delhi, it was said that the city reeked of the decomposing bodies of its citizens with their heads being erected like structures and the bodies left as food for the birds by Timur's soldiers. Timur's invasion and destruction of Delhi continued the chaos that was still consuming India, and the city would not be able to recover from the great loss it suffered for almost a century.[9]:?269–274? Campaigns in the Levant Timur defeating the Mamluk Sultan Nasir-ad-Din Faraj of Egypt 19th century painting depicting Bayezid I being held captive by Timur. Before the end of 1399, Timur started a war with Bayezid I, sultan of the Ottoman Empire, and the Mamluk sultan of Egypt Nasir-ad-Din Faraj. Bayezid began annexing the territory of Turkmen and Muslim rulers in Anatolia. As Timur claimed sovereignty over the Turkoman rulers, they took refuge behind him. In 1400, Timur invaded Armenia and Georgia. Of the surviving population, more than 60,000 of the local people were captured as slaves, and many districts were depopulated.[80] He also sacked Sivas in Asia Minor.[81] Then Timur turned his attention to Syria, sacking Aleppo,[82] and Damascus.[83] The city's inhabitants were massacred, except for the artisans, who were deported to Samarkand. Timur invaded Baghdad in June 1401. After the capture of the city, 20,000 of its citizens were massacred. Timur ordered that every soldier should return with at least two severed human heads to show him. When they ran out of men to kill, many warriors killed prisoners captured earlier in the campaign, and when they ran out of prisoners to kill, many resorted to beheading their own wives.[84] Invasion of Anatolia Main articles: Battle of Ankara and Ottoman Interregnum In the meantime, years of insulting letters had passed between Timur and Bayezid. Both rulers insulted each other in their own way while Timur preferred to undermine Bayezid's position as a ruler and play down the significance of his military successes. This is the excerpt from one of Timur's letters addressed to Ottoman sultan: "Believe me, you are but pismire ant: don't seek to fight the elephants for they'll crush you under their feet. Shall a petty prince such as you are contend with us? But your rodomontades (braggadocio) are not extraordinary; for a Turcoman never spake with judgement. If you don't follow our counsels you will regret it".[85] Finally, Timur invaded Anatolia and defeated Bayezid in the Battle of Ankara on 20 July 1402. Bayezid was captured in battle and subsequently died in captivity, initiating the twelve-year Ottoman Interregnum period. Timur's stated motivation for attacking Bayezid and the Ottoman Empire was the restoration of Seljuq authority. Timur saw the Seljuks as the rightful rulers of Anatolia as they had been granted rule by Mongol conquerors, illustrating again Timur's interest with Genghizid legitimacy.[citation needed] In December 1402, Timur besieged and took the city of Smyrna, a stronghold of the Christian Knights Hospitalers, thus he referred to himself as ghazi or "Warrior of Islam". A mass beheading was carried out in Smyrna by Timur's soldiers.[86][87][88][89] With the Treaty of Gallipoli in February 1402, Timur was furious with the Genoese and Venetians, as their ships ferried the Ottoman army to safety in Thrace. As Lord Kinross reported in The Ottoman Centuries, the Italians preferred the enemy they could handle to the one they could not.[citation needed] During the early interregnum, Bayezid I's son Mehmed Çelebi acted as Timur's vassal. Unlike other princes, Mehmed minted coins that had Timur's name stamped as "Demur han Gürgân" (????? ??? ??????), alongside his own as "Mehmed bin Bayezid han" (???? ?? ?????? ????).[90][91] This was probably an attempt on Mehmed's part to justify to Timur his conquest of Bursa after the Battle of Ulubad. After Mehmed established himself in Rum, Timur had already begun preparations for his return to Central Asia, and took no further steps to interfere with the status quo in Anatolia.[90] While Timur was still in Anatolia, Qara Yusuf assaulted Baghdad and captured it in 1402. Timur returned to Persia and sent his grandson Abu Bakr ibn Miran Shah to reconquer Baghdad, which he proceeded to do. Timur then spent some time in Ardabil, where he gave Ali Safavi, leader of the Safaviyya, a number of captives. Subsequently, he marched to Khorasan and then to Samarkhand, where he spent nine months celebrating and preparing to invade Mongolia and China.[92] Attempts to attack the Ming dynasty Timur had aligned himself with the remnants of the Northern Yuan dynasty in his attempts to conquer Ming China. The fortress at Jiayu Pass was strengthened due to fear of an invasion by Timur.[93] Timurid Empire at Timur's death in 1405 By 1368, Han Chinese forces had driven the Mongols out of China. The first of the new Ming dynasty's emperors, the Hongwu Emperor, and his son, the Yongle Emperor, produced tributary states of many Central Asian countries. The suzerain-vassal relationship between Ming empire and Timurid existed for a long time. In 1394, Hongwu's ambassadors eventually presented Timur with a letter addressing him as a subject. He had the ambassadors Fu An, Guo Ji, and Liu Wei detained.[94] Neither Hongwu's next ambassador, Chen Dewen (1397), nor the delegation announcing the accession of the Yongle Emperor fared any better. [94] Timur eventually planned to invade China. To this end Timur made an alliance with surviving Mongol tribes based in Mongolia and prepared all the way to Bukhara. Engke Khan sent his grandson Öljei Temür Khan, also known as "Buyanshir Khan" after he converted to Islam while at the court of Timur in Samarkand.[95] Death Timur preferred to fight his battles in the spring. However, he died en route during an uncharacteristic winter campaign. In December 1404, Timur began military campaigns against Ming China and detained a Ming envoy. He suffered illness while encamped on the farther side of the Syr Daria and died at Farab on 17 February 1405,[96] before ever reaching the Chinese border.[97] After his death the Ming envoys such as Fu An and the remaining entourage were released[94] by his grandson Khalil Sultan. Geographer Clements Markham, in his introduction to the narrative of Clavijo's embassy, states that, after Timur died, his body "was embalmed with musk and rose water, wrapped in linen, laid in an ebony coffin and sent to Samarkand, where it was buried".[98] His tomb, the Gur-e-Amir, still stands in Samarkand, though it has been heavily restored in recent years.[99] Succession Main article: Timurid Empire Timur's mausoleum is located in Samarkand, Uzbekistan. Timur had twice previously appointed an heir apparent to succeed him, both of whom he had outlived. The first, his son Jahangir, died of illness in 1376.[100][101]:?51? The second, his grandson Muhammad Sultan, had succumbed to battle wounds in 1403.[102] After the latter's death, Timur did nothing to replace him. It was only when he was on his own death-bed that he appointed Muhammad Sultan's younger brother, Pir Muhammad as his successor.[103] Pir Muhammad was unable to gain sufficient support from his relatives and a bitter civil war erupted amongst Timur's descendants, with multiple princes pursuing their claims. It was not until 1409 that Timur's youngest son, Shah Rukh was able to overcome his rivals and take the throne as Timur's successor.[104] Wives and concubines Timur had forty-three wives and concubines, all of these women were also his consorts. Timur made dozens of women his wives and concubines as he conquered their fathers' or erstwhile husbands' lands.[105] Turmish Agha, mother of Jahangir Mirza, Jahanshah Mirza and Aka Begi; Oljay Turkhan Agha (m. 1357/58), daughter of Amir Mashlah and granddaughter of Amir Qazaghan; Saray Mulk Khanum (m. 1367), widow of Amir Husain, and daughter of Qazan Khan; Islam Agha (m. 1367), widow of Amir Husain, and daughter of Amir Bayan Salduz; Ulus Agha (m. 1367), widow of Amir Husain, and daughter of Amir Khizr Yasuri; Dilshad Agha (m. 1374), daughter of Shams ed-Din and his wife Bujan Agha; Touman Agha (m. 1377), daughter of Amir Musa and his wife Arzu Mulk Agha, daughter of Amir Bayezid Jalayir; Chulpan Mulk Agha, daughter of Haji Beg of Jetah; Tukal Khanum (m. 1397), daughter of Mongol Khan Khizr Khawaja Oglan;[101]:?24–5? Tolun Agha, concubine, and mother of Umar Shaikh Mirza I; Mengli Agha, concubine, and mother of Miran Shah; Toghay Turkhan Agha, lady from the Kara Khitai, widow of Amir Husain, and mother of Shah Rukh; Tughdi Bey Agha, daughter of Aq Sufi Qongirat; Sultan Aray Agha, a Nukuz lady; Malikanshah Agha, a Filuni lady; Khand Malik Agha, mother of Ibrahim Mirza; Sultan Agha, mother of a son who died in infancy; His other wives and concubines included: Dawlat Tarkan Agha, Burhan Agha, Jani Beg Agha, Tini Beg Agha, Durr Sultan Agha, Munduz Agha, Bakht Sultan Agha, Nowruz Agha, Jahan Bakht Agha, Nigar Agha, Ruhparwar Agha, Dil Beg Agha, Dilshad Agha, Murad Beg Agha, Piruzbakht Agha, Khoshkeldi Agha, Dilkhosh Agha, Barat Bey Agha, Sevinch Malik Agha, Arzu Bey Agha, Yadgar Sultan Agha, Khudadad Agha, Bakht Nigar Agha, Qutlu Bey Agha, and another Nigar Agha[citation needed]. Descendants See also: Timurid family tree Sons of Timur Umar Shaikh Mirza I – with Tolun Agha Jahangir Mirza – with Turmish Agha Miran Shah Mirza – with Mengli Agha Shah Rukh Mirza – with Toghay Turkhan Agha Daughters of Timur Aka Begi (died 1382) – by Turmish Agha. Married to Muhammad Beg, son of Amir Musa Tayichiud Sultan Husayn Tayichiud Sultan Bakht Begum (died 1429/30) – by Oljay Turkhan Agha. Married first Muhammad Mirke Apardi, married second, 1389/90, Sulayman Shah Dughlat Sa'adat Sultan – by Dilshad Agha Bikijan – by Mengli Agha Qutlugh Sultan Agha – by Toghay Turkhan Agha[106][107] Sons of Umar Shaikh Mirza I Pir Muhammad Iskandar Rustam Bayqara I Mansur Sultan Husayn Bayqarah Badi' al-Zaman Muhammed Mu'min Muhammad Zaman Mirza Muzaffar Hussein Ibrahim Hussein Sons of Jahangir Muhammad Sultan Mirza Pir Muhammad Sons of Miran Shah Khalil Sultan Abu Bakr Muhammad Mirza Abu Sa'id Mirza Umar Shaikh Mirza II Zahir-ud-din Muhammad Babur the Mughals Jahangir Mirza II Sons of Shah Rukh Mirza Mirza Muhammad Taraghay – better known as Ulugh Beg Abdul-Latif Ghiyath-al-Din Baysunghur Ala al-Dawla Mirza Ibrahim Mirza Sultan Muhammad Yadigar Muhammad Abul-Qasim Babur Mirza Sultan Ibrahim Mirza Abdullah Mirza Mirza Soyurghatmïsh Khan Muhammad Juki Religious views A modern portrait of Timur in Gur-e-Amir, Samarkand. Timur was a practicing Sunni Muslim, possibly belonging to the Naqshbandi school, which was influential in Transoxiana.[108] His chief official religious counsellor and adviser was the Hanafi scholar 'Abdu 'l-Jabbar Khwarazmi. In Tirmidh, he had come under the influence of his spiritual mentor Sayyid Baraka, a leader from Balkh who is buried alongside Timur in Gur-e-Amir.[109][110][111] Timur was known to hold Ali and the Ahl al-Bayt in high regard and has been noted by various scholars for his "pro-Shia" stance. However, he also punished Shias for desecrating the memories of the Sahaba.[112] Timur was also noted for attacking the Shia with Sunni apologism, while at other times he attacked Sunnis on religious ground as well.[113] In contrast, Timur held the Seljuk Sultan Ahmad Sanjar in high regard for attacking the Ismailis at Alamut, while Timur's own attack on Ismailis at Anjudan was equally brutal.[113] Personality A Timurid-era illustration of Timur Timur is regarded as a military genius and as a brilliant tactician with an uncanny ability to work within a highly fluid political structure to win and maintain a loyal following of nomads during his rule in Central Asia. He was also considered extraordinarily intelligent—not only intuitively but also intellectually.[114] In Samarkand and his many travels, Timur, under the guidance of distinguished scholars, was able to learn the Persian, Mongolian, and Turkish languages[9]:?9? (according to Ahmad ibn Arabshah, Timur could not speak Arabic).[115] According to John Joseph Saunders, Timur was "the product of an Islamized and Iranized society", and not steppe nomadic.[116] More importantly, Timur was characterized as an opportunist. Taking advantage of his Turco-Mongolian heritage, Timur frequently used either the Islamic religion or the sharia law, fiqh, and traditions of the Mongol Empire to achieve his military goals or domestic political aims.[9] Timur was a learned king, and enjoyed the company of scholars; he was tolerant and generous to them. He was a contemporary of the Persian poet Hafez, and a story of their meeting explains that Timur summoned Hafiz, who had written a ghazal with the following verse: For the black mole on thy cheek I would give the cities of Samarkand and Bukhara. Timur upbraided him for this verse and said, "By the blows of my well tempered sword I have conquered the greater part of the world to enlarge Samarkand and Bukhara, my capitals and residences; and you, pitiful creature, would exchange these two cities for a mole." Hafez, undaunted, replied, "It is by similar generosity that I have been reduced, as you see, to my present state of poverty." It is reported that the King was pleased by the witty answer and the poet departed with magnificent gifts.[117][118] There is a shared view that Timur's real motive for his campaigns was his imperialistic ambition. However, Timur's following words: "The whole expanse of the inhabited part of the world is not large enough to have two kings" explains that his true desire was "to amaze the world", and through his destructive campaigns, to produce an impression rather than to achieve enduring results. This is supported by the fact that besides Iran, Timur simply plundered the states he invaded with a purpose of enriching his native Samarqand and neglected the conquered areas, which may have resulted in a relatively quick disintegration of his Empire after his death.[119] Timur used Persian expressions in his conversations often, and his motto was the Persian phrase r?st? rust? (????? ????, meaning "truth is safety" or "veritas salus").[115] He is credited with the invention of the Tamerlane chess variant, played on a 10×11 board.[120] Exchanges with Europe Main article: Timurid relations with Europe Letter of Timur to Charles VI of France, 1402, a witness to Timurid relations with Europe. Archives Nationales, Paris. Timur had numerous epistolary and diplomatic exchanges with various European states, especially Spain and France. Relations between the court of Henry III of Castile and that of Timur played an important part in medieval Castilian diplomacy. In 1402, the time of the Battle of Ankara, two Spanish ambassadors were already with Timur: Pelayo de Sotomayor and Fernando de Palazuelos. Later, Timur sent to the court of the Kingdom of León and Castile a Chagatai ambassador named Hajji Muhammad al-Qazi with letters and gifts. In return, Henry III of Castile sent a famous embassy to Timur's court in Samarkand in 1403–06, led by Ruy González de Clavijo, with two other ambassadors, Alfonso Paez and Gomez de Salazar. On their return, Timur affirmed that he regarded the king of Castile "as his very own son". According to Clavijo, Timur's good treatment of the Spanish delegation contrasted with the disdain shown by his host toward the envoys of the "lord of Cathay" (i.e., the Yongle Emperor), the Chinese ruler. Clavijo's visit to Samarkand allowed him to report to the European audience on the news from Cathay (China), which few Europeans had been able to visit directly in the century that had passed since the travels of Marco Polo. The French archives preserve: A 30 July 1402 letter from Timur to Charles VI of France, suggesting that he send traders to Asia. It is written in Persian.[121] A May 1403 letter. This is a Latin transcription of a letter from Timur to Charles VI, and another from Miran Shah, his son, to the Christian princes, announcing their victory over Bayezid I at Smyrna.[122] A copy has been kept of the answer of Charles VI to Timur, dated 15 June 1403.[123] In addition, Byzantine John VII Palaiologos who was a regent during his uncle's absence in the West, sent a Dominican friar in August 1401 to Timur, to pay his respect and propose paying tribute to him instead of the Turks, once he managed to defeat them.[81] Legacy Timur's legacy is a mixed one. While Central Asia blossomed under his reign, other places, such as Baghdad, Damascus, Delhi and other Arab, Georgian, Persian, and Indian cities were sacked and destroyed and their populations massacred. He was responsible for the effective destruction of the Nestorian Christian Church of the East in much of Asia. Thus, while Timur still retains a positive image in Muslim Central Asia, he is vilified by many in Arabia, Iraq, Persia, and India, where some of his greatest atrocities were carried out. However, Ibn Khaldun praises Timur for having unified much of the Muslim world when other conquerors of the time could not.[124] The next great conqueror of the Middle East, Nader Shah, was greatly influenced by Timur and almost re-enacted Timur's conquests and battle strategies in his own campaigns. Like Timur, Nader Shah conquered most of Caucasia, Persia, and Central Asia along with also sacking Delhi. Timur's short-lived empire also melded the Turko-Persian tradition in Transoxiana, and in most of the territories that he incorporated into his fiefdom, Persian became the primary language of administration and literary culture (diwan), regardless of ethnicity.[125] In addition, during his reign, some contributions to Turkic literature were penned, with Turkic cultural influence expanding and flourishing as a result. A literary form of Chagatai Turkic came into use alongside Persian as both a cultural and an official language.[126] Emir Timur and his forces advance against the Golden Horde, Khan Tokhtamysh. Tamerlane virtually exterminated the Church of the East, which had previously been a major branch of Christianity but afterwards became largely confined to a small area now known as the Assyrian Triangle.[127] Timur became a relatively popular figure in Europe for centuries after his death, mainly because of his victory over the Ottoman Sultan Bayezid. The Ottoman armies were at the time invading Eastern Europe and Timur was ironically seen as an ally. Statue of Tamerlane in Uzbekistan. In the background are the ruins of his summer palace in Shahrisabz. Timur is officially recognized as a national hero in Uzbekistan. His monument in Tashkent now occupies the place where Karl Marx's statue once stood. Muhammad Iqbal, a philosopher, poet and politician in British India who is widely regarded as having inspired the Pakistan Movement,[128] composed a notable poem entitled Dream of Timur, the poem itself was inspired by a prayer of the last Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah II:[citation needed] The Sharif of the Hijaz suffers due to the divisive sectarian schisms of his faith, And lo! that young Tatar (Timur) has boldly re-envisioned magnanimous victories of overwhelming conquest. In 1794, Sake Dean Mahomed published his travel book, The Travels of Dean Mahomet. The book begins with the praise of Genghis Khan, Timur, and particularly the first Mughal emperor, Babur. He also gives important details on the then incumbent Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II. Historical sources Ahmad ibn Arabshah's work on the Life of Timur The earliest known history of his reign was Nizam ad-Din Shami's Zafarnama, which was written during Timur's lifetime. Between 1424 and 1428, Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi wrote a second Zafarnama drawing heavily on Shami's earlier work. Ahmad ibn Arabshah wrote a much less favorable history in Arabic. Arabshah's history was translated into Latin by the Dutch Orientalist Jacobus Golius in 1636. As Timurid-sponsored histories, the two Zafarnamas present a dramatically different picture from Arabshah's chronicle. William Jones remarked that the former presented Timur as a "liberal, benevolent and illustrious prince" while the latter painted him as "deformed and impious, of a low birth and detestable principles".[52] Malfuzat-i Timuri The Malfuzat-i Timur? and the appended Tuz?k-i T?m?r?, supposedly Timur's own autobiography, are almost certainly 17th-century fabrications.[28][129] The scholar Abu Taleb Hosayni presented the texts to the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan, a distant descendant of Timur, in 1637–38, supposedly after discovering the Chagatai language originals in the library of a Yemeni ruler. Due to the distance between Yemen and Timur's base in Transoxiana and the lack of any other evidence of the originals, most historians consider the story highly implausible, and suspect Hosayni of inventing both the text and its origin story.[129] European views Timur arguably had a significant impact on the Renaissance culture and early modern Europe.[130] His achievements both fascinated and horrified Europeans from the fifteenth century to the early nineteenth century. European views of Timur were mixed throughout the fifteenth century, with some European countries calling him an ally and others seeing him as a threat to Europe because of his rapid expansion and brutality.[131]:?341? When Timur captured the Ottoman Sultan Bayezid at Ankara, he was often praised and seen as a trusted ally by European rulers, such as Charles VI of France and Henry IV of England, because they believed he was saving Christianity from the Turkic Empire in the Middle East. Those two kings also praised him because his victory at Ankara allowed Christian merchants to remain in the Middle East and allowed for their safe return home to both France and England. Timur was also praised because it was believed that he helped restore the right of passage for Christian pilgrims to the Holy Land.[131]:?341–44? Other Europeans viewed Timur as a barbaric enemy who presented a threat to both European culture and the religion of Christianity. His rise to power moved many leaders, such as Henry III of Castile, to send embassies to Samarkand to scout out Timur, learn about his people, make alliances with him, and try to convince him to convert to Christianity in order to avoid war.[131]:?348–49? In the introduction to a 1723 translation of Yazdi's Zafarnama, the translator wrote:[132] [M. Petis de la Croix] tells us, that there are calumnies and impostures, which have been published by authors of romances, and Turkish writers who were his enemies, and envious at his glory: among whom is Ahmed Bin Arabschah ... As Timur-Bec had conquered the Turks and Arabians of Syria, and had even taken the Sultan Bajazet prisoner, it is no wonder that he has been misrepresented by the historians of those nations, who, in despite of truth, and against the dignity of history, have fallen into great excesses on this subject. Exhumation and alleged curse A wax statue of Timur made in Turkey Timur's body was exhumed from his tomb on 19 June 1941 and his remains examined by the Soviet anthropologists Mikhail M. Gerasimov, Lev V. Oshanin and V. Ia. Zezenkova. Gerasimov reconstructed the likeness of Timur from his skull and found that his facial characteristics displayed "typical Mongoloid features" (the correct modern classification term being changed to East Asian).[133][134][135] An anthropologic study of Timur's cranium shows that he belonged predominately to the South Siberian Mongoloid type.[136] At 5 feet 8 inches (173 centimeters), Timur was tall for his era. The examinations confirmed that Timur was lame and had a withered right arm due to his injuries. His right thighbone had knitted together with his kneecap, and the configuration of the knee joint suggests that he had kept his leg bent at all times and therefore would have had a pronounced limp.[137] He appears to have been broad-chested and his hair and beard were red.[138][139] It is alleged that Timur's tomb was inscribed with the words, "When I rise from the dead, the world shall tremble." It is also said that when Gerasimov exhumed the body, an additional inscription inside the casket was found, which read, "Whomsoever [sic] opens my tomb shall unleash an invader more terrible than I."[140] Even though people close to Gerasimov claim that this story is a fabrication, the legend persists.[141] In any case, three days after Gerasimov began the exhumation, Adolf Hitler launched Operation Barbarossa, the largest military invasion of all time, upon the Soviet Union.[142] Timur was re-buried with full Islamic ritual in November 1942 just before the Soviet victory at the Battle of Stalingrad.[143] In the arts Tamburlaine the Great, Parts I and II (English, 1563–1594): play by Christopher Marlowe Tamerlan ou la mort de Bajazet [Tamerlane or the Death of Bajazet] (1675): play by Jacques Pradon. Tamerlane (1701): play by Nicholas Rowe (English) Tamerlano (1724): opera by George Frideric Handel, in Italian, based on the 1675 Pradon play. Bajazet (1735): opera by Antonio Vivaldi, portrays the capture of Bayezid I by Timur. Il gran Tamerlano (1772): opera by Josef Myslivecek which also portrays the capture of Bayezid I by Timur. Timour the Tartar (1811): equestrian drama by Matthew Lewis Tamerlane (published 1827): first published poem of Edgar Allan Poe. Turandot (1924): opera by Giacomo Puccini (libretto by Giuseppe Adami and Renato Simoni) in which Timur is the deposed, blind former King of Tartary and father of the protagonist Calaf. Lord of Samarkand (The Lame Man; published 1932): story by Robert E. Howard in which Timour appears. Nesimi (1973): Azerbaijani film in which Timur was portrayed by Yusif Veliyev.[144] Tamerlan (2003): Spanish-language novel by Colombian writer Enrique Serrano[145] Day Watch (2006): Russian film in which Tamerlane in his youth is portrayed by Emir Baygazin, and in maturity by Gani Kulzhanov.[146] Tamburlaine: Shadow of God (broadcast 2008): a BBC Radio 3 play by John Fletcher presenting a fictitious encounter between Tamburlaine, Ibn Khaldun, and Hafez.[147] Age of Empires II: Definitive Edition (2019): a video game containing a six-chapter campaign titled "Tamerlane".[148] Examples of Timurid architecture Geometric courtyard surrounding the tomb showing the Iwan, and dome. View of the Registan. Timurid Mosque in Herat. Goharshad Mosque Green Mosque (Balkh) is a Timurid mosque that inspired Shah Jahan. Bibi-Khanym Mosque Mausoleum of Khoja Ahmed Yasawi Deep niches and diverse muqarnas decorate the inside of the Gur-e Amir. Shakh-i Zindeh mosque, Samarkand See also Global Empire Muslim conquest in the Indian subcontinent Timuri Timurid conquests and invasions Timurlengia Notes ^ /t??m??r/  • Sometimes spelled Taimur or Temur.  • Historically best known as Amir Timur, Tamerlane[4] (Persian: ????? ???? Tem?r(-i) Lang; Chagatay: ????? ????? Aqsaq Temür,[5] lit. 'Timur the Lame') or as Sahib-i-Qiran (lit. 'Lord of the Auspicious Conjunction'), his epithet.[6] ^ To legitimize his rule, Timur claimed the title Guregen (lit. 'royal son-in-law') when he married Saray Mulk Khanum, a princess of Chinggisid descent.[7] ^ Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. 9. Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. 1847. p. 377. ^ a b Muntakhab-al Lubab, Khafi Khan Nizam-ul-Mulki, Vol I, p. 49. Printed in Lahore, 1985 ^ W. M. Thackston, A Century of Princes: Sources on Timurid History and Art, (1989), p.239 ^ /?tæm?rle?n/ ^ Johanson, Lars (1998). The Turkic Languages. Routledge. p. 27. ISBN 0-415-08200-5. ^ ?In?yat Kh?n, Mu?ammad ??hir ?šn? ?In?yat ??n (1990). The Shah Jahan Nama of 'Inayat Khan: An Abridged History of the Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan, Compiled by His Royal Librarian: the Nineteenth-century Manuscript Translation of A.R. Fuller (British Library, Add. 30,777. Oxford University Press. pp. 11–17.CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link) ^ a b Manz 1999, p. 14. ^ Heissig, Walther; Sagaster, Klaus (1989). Gedanke und Wirkung: Festschrift zum 90. Geburtstag von Nikolaus Poppe. p. 115. ISBN 9783447028936. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Marozzi, Justin (2004). Tamerlane: Sword of Islam, conqueror of the world. HarperCollins. ^ Josef W. Meri (2005). Medieval Islamic Civilization. Routledge. p. 812. ISBN 9780415966900. ^ "Counterview: Taimur's actions were uniquely horrific in Indian history". ^ Darwin, John (2008). After Tamerlane: the rise and fall of global empires, 1400–2000. Bloomsbury Press. pp. 29, 92. ISBN 978-1-59691-760-6. ^ Manz 1999, p. 1. ^ Marozzi, Justin (2006). Tamerlane: Sword of Islam, Conqueror of the World. Da Capo Press. p. 342. ISBN 978-0-306-81465-5. ^ Donald M. Seekins, Richard F. Nyrop (1986). Afghanistan A Country Study · Volume 550, Issues 65-986. The Studies. p. 11. ISBN 9780160239298 – via University of California. Timur was of both Turkish and Mongol descent and claimed Genghis Khan as an ancestorCS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link) ^ International Association for Mongol Studies; Secretariat, Kokusai K?ry? Kikin; Unesco (2002). Eighth International Congress of Mongolists being convened under the patronage of N. Bagabandi, president of Mongolia. OUMSKh-ny Nari?n bichgi?n darga naryn gazar. p. 377 – via Indiana University. First of all, Timur's genealogy gives him a common ancestor with Chinggis Khan in Tumbinai - sechen or Tumanay KhanCS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link) ^ a b Woods, John E. (2002). Timur and Chinggis Khan. Eighth International Congress of Mongolists being convened under the patronage of N. Bagabandi, president of Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar: OUMSKh-ny Nari?n bichgi?n darga naryn gazar. p. 377. ^ Henry Cabot Lodge (1916). The History of Nations Volume 14. P. F. Collier & son. p. 46. ISBN 9780160239298 – via University of Minnesota. Timur the Lame, from the effects of an early wound, a name which some European writers have converted into Tamerlane, or Tamberlaine. He was of Mongol origin, and a direct descendant, by the mother's side, of Genghis Khan ^ a b c Ahmad ibn Arabshah; McChesney, Robert D. (2017). Tamerlane: The Life of the Great Amir. Translated by M. M. Khorramia. Bloomsbury Academic. p. 4. ISBN 978-1-78453-170-6. ^ Richard C. Martin, Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim World A-L, Macmillan Reference USA, 2004, ISBN 978-0-02-865604-5, p. 134. ^ a b Gérard Chaliand, Nomadic Empires: From Mongolia to the Danube translated by A.M. Berrett, Transaction Publishers, 2004. translated by A.M. Berrett. Transaction Publishers, p.75. ISBN 0-7658-0204-X. Limited preview at Google Books. p. 75., ISBN 0-7658-0204-X, p.75., "Timur Leng (Tamerlane) Timur, known as the lame (1336–1405) was a Muslim Turk. He aspired to recreate the empire of his ancestors. He was a military genius who loved to play chess in his spare time to improve his military tactics and skill. And although he wielded absolute power, he never called himself more than an emir.", "Timur Leng (Tamerlane) Timur, known as the lame (1336–1405) was a Muslim Turk from the Umus of Chagatai who saw himself as Genghis Khan's heir." ^ Forbes Manz, Beatrice (April 1998). "Temür and the Problem of a Conqueror's Legacy". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. Third. 8 (1): 21–41. doi:10.1017/S1356186300016412. JSTOR 25183464. ^ Matthew White: Atrocitology: Humanity's 100 Deadliest Achievements, Canongate Books, 2011, ISBN 9780857861252, section "Timur" ^ "The Rehabilitation of Tamerlane". Chicago Tribune. 17 January 1999. ^ J.J. Saunders, The history of the Mongol conquests (page 174), Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1971, ISBN 0812217667 ^ Barthold, V.V. (1962). Four studies on the History of Central Asia, vol. 1 (Second Printing, 1962 ed.). Leiden, E.J.Brill. p. 61. ^ "Timur". Encyclopædia Britannica, Online Academic Edition. 2007. ^ a b c Beatrice F. Manz (2000). "T?m?r Lang". Encyclopaedia of Islam. 10 (2nd ed.). Brill. Retrieved 24 April 2014. ^ a b Woods, John E. (1990). Martin Bernard Dickson; Michel M. Mazzaoui; Vera Basch Moreen (eds.). "Timur's Genealogy". Intellectual Studies on Islam: Essays Written in Honor of Martin B. Dickson. University of Utah Press: 97. ISBN 978-0-87480-342-6. ^ Mackenzie, Franklin (1963). The Ocean and the Steppe: The Life and Times of the Mongol Conqueror Genghis Khan, 1155-1227. Vantage Press. p. 322. ^ Woods (1990, p. 90) ^ Woods, John E. (1991). The Timurid dynasty. Indiana University, Research Institute for Inner Asian Studies. p. 9. ^ Haidar, Mansura (2004). Indo-Central Asian Relations: From Early Times to Medieval Period. Manohar. p. 126. ISBN 978-81-7304-508-0. ^ Keene, H. G. (2001) [1878]. The Turks in India. Honolulu: University Press of the Pacific. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-89875-534-3. ^ Manz 1999, pp. 164–65. ^ Fischel, Walter J. (1952). Ibn Khaldun and Tamerlane. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. p. 37. ^ Sela, Ron (2011). The Legendary Biographies of Tamerlane: Islam and Heroic Apocrypha in Central Asia. Cambridge University Press. p. 27. ISBN 978-1-139-49834-0. ^ a b "Tamerlane". AsianHistory. Retrieved 1 November 2013. ^ Richard Peters, The Story of the Turks: From Empire to Democracy (1959), p. 24 ^ Glassé, Cyril (2001). The new encyclopedia of Islam (Rev. ed.). Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press. ISBN 0-7591-0189-2. OCLC 48553252. ^ Sinor, Denis (1 March 1990), "Introduction: the concept of Inner Asia", The Cambridge History of Early Inner Asia, Cambridge University Press, pp. 1–18, doi:10.1017/chol9780521243049.002, ISBN 978-0-521-24304-9, retrieved 6 April 2021 ^ a b c Manz, Beatrice Forbes (1988). "Tamerlane and the symbolism of sovereignty". Iranian Studies. 21 (1–2): 105–122. doi:10.1080/00210868808701711. JSTOR 4310596. ^ "Central Asia, history of Timur", in Encyclopædia Britannica, Online Edition, 2007. (Quotation:"Under his leadership, Timur united the Mongol tribes located in the basins of the two rivers.") ^ "Islamic world", in Encyclopædia Britannica, Online Edition, 2007. Quotation: "Timur (Tamerlane) was of Mongol descent and he aimed to restore Mongol power." ^ Carter V. Findley, The Turks in World History, Oxford University Press, 2005, Oxford University Press, 2005, ISBN 978-0-19-517726-8, p. 101. ^ G. R. Garthwaite, The Persians, Malden, ISBN 978-1-55786-860-2, MA: Blackwell Pub., 2007. (p.148) Quotation: "Timur's tribe, the Barlas, had Mongol origins but had become Turkic-speaking ... However, the Barlus tribe is considered one of the original Mongol tribes and there are "Barlus Ovogton" people who belong to Barlus tribe in modern Mongolia." ^ M.S. Asimov & Clifford Edmund Bosworth, History of Civilizations of Central Asia, UNESCO Regional Office, 1998, ISBN 92-3-103467-7, p. 320: "One of his followers was [...] Timur of the Barlas tribe. This Mongol tribe had settled [...] in the valley of Kashka Darya, intermingling with the Turkic population, adopting their religion (Islam) and gradually giving up its own nomadic ways, like a number of other Mongol tribes in Transoxania ..." ^ Beatrice Forbes Manz, Tamerlane and the Symbolism of Sovereignty (1988), p. 116 ^ Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi, Zafarnama (1424–1428), p. 35 ^ Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi, Zafarnama (1424–1428), p. 75 ^ a b Ian C. Hannah (1900). A brief history of eastern Asia. T.F. Unwin. p. 92. Retrieved 30 December 2015. ^ a b c d e Goldsmid 1911, p. 994. ^ a b Manz, Beatrice Forbes (2002). "Tamerlane's Career and Its Uses". Journal of World History. 13: 3. doi:10.1353/jwh.2002.0017. S2CID 143436772. ^ Denise Aigle The Mongol Empire between Myth and Reality: Studies in Anthropological History BRILL, 28 October 2014 p. 132 ^ Nicholas V. Raisanovsky; Mark D. Steinberg: A History of Russia Seventh Edition, pg 93 ^ "Commemoration of the Vladimir Icon of the Mother of God and the deliverance of Moscow from the Invasion of Tamerlane". oca.org. Retrieved 5 February 2019. ^ Wescoat, James L.; Wolschke-Bulmahn, Joachim (1996). Mughal Gardens. google.ca. ISBN 9780884022350. ^ Charles, p. 32. ^ Timur (18 April 2013). The Mulfuzat Timury, Or, Autobiographical Memoirs of the Moghul Emperor Timur: Written in the Jagtay Turky Language. Cambridge University Press. pp. vii–xxxvii. ISBN 978-1-108-05602-1. ^ Melville 2020, p. 56. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMelville2020 (help) ^ Manz 1999, p. 67-71. ^ Charles, p. 97-100. ^ a b Chaliand, Gerard; Arnaud Blin (2007). The History of Terrorism: From Antiquity to Al Qaeda. University of California Press. p. 87. ISBN 978-0-520-24709-3. isfahan Timur. ^ Fisher, W.B.; Jackson, P.; Lockhart, L.; Boyle, J.A. : The Cambridge History of Iran, p55. ^ Strange 1905, p. 267-287. ^ Manz 1999, p. 123-125. ^ Charles 2020, p. 109. sfn error: no target: CITEREFCharles2020 (help) ^ Shterenshis, Michael (2002). Tamerlane and the Jews. Psychology Press. pp. 144–189. ISBN 978-0-7007-1696-8. ^ Strange, Guy Le (1905). The Lands of the Eastern Caliphate: Mesopotamia, Persia, and Central Asia, from the Moslem Conquest to the Time of Timur. University Press. p. 235. ^ Morgan, David (19 September 2014). Medieval Persia 1040-1797. Routledge. pp. 167–184. ISBN 978-1-317-87140-8. ^ Nicholas V. Raisanovsky; Mark D. Steinberg: A History of Russia Seventh Edition, pg 94 ^ a b Virani, Shafique N. The Ismailis in the Middle Ages: A History of Survival, A Search for Salvation (New York: Oxford University Press), 2007, p. 116. ^ Hunter, Sir William Wilson (1909). "The Indian Empire: Timur's invasion 1398". The Imperial Gazetteer of India. 2. p. 366. ^ [1] The History of India, edited by Kenneth Pletcher Senior Editor, Geography and History pg.131 ^ Hooja, Rima (2006). A History of Rajasthan. Rupa and company. p. 371. ISBN 9788129108906. Bhatner was taken in 1391 by Timur from the Bhati Rajput King named Dulachand ^ a b History of India, as Told by Its Own Historians: The Muhammadan Period By Henry Miers Elliot pg.489-493 [2] ^ Ganga: The Many Pasts of a River ^ Singh, Raj Pal (1 January 1988). Rise of the Jat power. ISBN 9788185151052. Retrieved 22 May 2012. ^ Mallu, who later received the title of Iqbal Khan, was a noble in Siri and an ally of Muqarrab Khan, but later on betrayed him and Nusrat Khan, and allied with Nasir-ud-din Mahmud Shah. History Of Medieval India; V. D. Mahajan p.205 ^ "The Turco-Mongol Invasions". Rbedrosian.com. Retrieved 22 May 2012. ^ a b Nicol 1993, p. 314. ^ Masters, Bruce (1999). "Aleppo:the Ottoman Empire's caravan city". In Eldem, Edhem; Goffman, Daniel; Master, Bruce (eds.). The Ottoman City Between East and West: Aleppo, Izmir, and Istanbul. Cambridge University Press. p. 20. ^ Margaret Meserve, Empires of Islam in Renaissance Historical Thought, (Harvard University Press, 2008), 207. ^ Ibn Arabshah, Timur the Great Amir, p. 168 ^ Rhoads Murphey, Exploring Ottoman Sovereignty: Tradition, Image and Practice in the Ottoman Imperial Household 1400-1800; published by Continium, 2008; page-58 ^ Kevin Reilly (2012). The Human Journey: A Concise Introduction to World History. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 164–. ISBN 978-1-4422-1384-5. ^ Henry Cabot Lodge (1913). The History of Nations. P.F.Collier. pp. 51–. ^ Marina Belozerskaya (4 September 2012). Medusas Gaze: The Extraordinary Journey of the Tazza Farnese. Oxford University Press. pp. 88–. ISBN 978-0-19-987642-6. ^ Vertot (abbé de) (1856). The History of the Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem: Styled Afterwards, the Knights of Rhodes, and at Present, the Knights of Malta. J.W. Leonard & Company. pp. 104–. ^ a b Dimitris J. Kastritsis (2007). The Sons of Bayezid: Empire Building and Representation in the Ottoman Civil War of 1402-1413. Brill. p. 49. ^ Nuri Pere (1968). Osmanl?larda madenî paralar: Yap? ve Kredi Bankas?n?n Osmanl? madenî paralar? kolleksiyonu. Yap? ve Kredi Bankas?. p. 64. ^ Stevens, John. The history of Persia. Containing, the lives and memorable actions of its kings from the first erecting of that monarchy to this time; an exact Description of all its Dominions; a curious Account of India, China, Tartary, Kermon, Arabia, Nixabur, and the Islands of Ceylon and Timor; as also of all Cities occasionally mention'd, as Schiras, Samarkand, Bokara, &c. Manners and Customs of those People, Persian Worshippers of Fire; Plants, Beasts, Product, and Trade. With many instructive and pleasant digressions, being remarkable Stories or Passages, occasionally occurring, as Strange Burials; Burning of the Dead; Liquors of several Countries; Hunting; Fishing; Practice of Physick; famous Physicians in the East; Actions of Tamerlan, &c. To which is added, an abridgment of the lives of the kings of Harmuz, or Ormuz. The Persian history written in Arabick, by Mirkond, a famous Eastern Author that of Ormuz, by Torunxa, King of that Island, both of them translated into Spanish, by Antony Teixeira, who liv'd several Years in Persia and India; and now render'd into English. ^ Turnbull, Stephen (30 January 2007). The Great Wall of China 221 BC-1644 AD. Osprey Publishing. p. 23. ISBN 978-1-84603-004-8. Retrieved 26 March 2010. ^ a b c Tsai 2002, pp. 188–189. ^ C. P. Atwood-Encyclopedia of Mongolia and the Mongol Empire, see: Northern Yuan Dynasty ^ Adela C.Y. Lee. "Tamerlane (1336–1405) – The Last Great Nomad Power". Silkroad Foundation. Retrieved 22 May 2012. ^ Tsai 2002, p. 161. ^ James Louis Garvin, Franklin Henry Hooper, Warren E. Cox, The Encyclopedia Britannica, Volume 22 (1929), p. 233 ^ Abdulla Vakhabov, Muslims in the USSR (1980), p. 63-4 ^ Roya Marefat, Beyond the Architecture of Death: Shrine of the Shah-i Zinda in Samarqand (1991), p. 238 ^ a b Vasilii Vladimirovitch Barthold, Four Studies on the History of Central Asia, Vol. 2 (1959) ^ Marthe Bernus-Taylor, Tombs of Paradise: The Shah-e Zende in Samarkand and Architectural Ceramics of Central Asia (2003), p. 27 ^ Beatrice Forbes Manz, Power, Politics and Religion in Timurid Iran (2007), p. 16 ^ William Bayne Fisher, Peter Jackson, Peter Avery, Lawrence Lockhart, John Andrew Boyle, Ilya Gershevitch, Richard Nelson Frye, Charles Melville, Gavin Hambly, The Cambridge History of Iran, Volume VI (1986), p. 99-101 ^ Ph. D., History; J. D., University of Washington School of Law; B. A., History. "Biography of Tamerlane, 14th Century Conqueror of Asia". ThoughtCo. Retrieved 20 February 2020. ^ Woods (1991, pp. 17–19) ^ Vasilii Vladimirovitch Barthold, Four Studies on the History of Central Asia, Vol. 2 (1963), p. 31 ^ Manz 1999, p. 17. ^ "The Descendants of Sayyid Ata and the Rank of Naq?b in Central Asia" by Devin DeWeese Journal of the American Oriental Society, Vol. 115, No. 4 (Oct. – Dec. 1995), pp. 612–634 ^ Four studies on the history of Central Asia, Volume 1 By Vasilij Vladimirovi? Bartold p.19 ^ Islamic art By Barbara Brend p.130 ^ Michael Shterenshis Tamerlane and the Jews Routledge ISBN 9781136873669 p. 38 ^ a b Virani, Shafique N. The Ismailis in the Middle Ages: A History of Survival, A Search for Salvation (New York: Oxford University Press), 2007, p. 114. ^ Manz 1999, p. 16. ^ a b Walter Joseph Fischel, Ibn Khald?n in Egypt: His Public Functions and His Historical Research, 1382–1406; a Study in Islamic Historiography, University of California Press, 1967, page 51, footnote ^ Saunders, J. J. (March 2001). The History of the Mongol Conquests. University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 173–. ISBN 978-0-8122-1766-7. ^ Holden, Edward S. (2004) [1895]. The Mogul Emperors of Hindustan (1398–1707 A.D). New Delhi, India: Westminster, Archibald Constable and Co. pp. 47–48. ISBN 978-81-206-1883-1. ^ Cowell, Professor (first name not given). MacMillan's Magazine, vol. XXX (via Google Books). London: MacMillan & Co., 1874, p. 252. ^ Barthold, V.V. (1962). Four studies on the History of Central Asia, vol. 1 (Second Printing, 1962 ed.). Leiden, E.J.Brill. pp. 59–60. ^ Cazaux, Jean-Louis and Knowlton, Rick (2017). A World of Chess, p.31. McFarland. ISBN 9780786494279. "Often known as Tamerlane chess, [its invention] is traditionally attributed to the conqueror himself." ^ Document preserved at Le Musée de l'Histoire de France, code AE III 204. Mentioned Dossier II, 7, J936 ^ Mentioned Dossier II, 7 bis ^ Mentioned Dossier II, 7 ter ^ Frances Carney Gies (September–October 1978). "The Man Who Met Tamerlane". Saudi Aramco World. 29 (5). Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2011. ^ Manz 1999, p. 109"In Temür's government, as in those of most nomad dynasties, it is impossible to find a clear distinction between civil and military affairs, or to identify the Persian bureaucracy as solely civil or the Turko-Mongolian solely with military government. In fact, it is difficult to define the sphere of either side of the administration and we find Persians and Chaghatays sharing many tasks. (In discussing the settled bureaucracy and the people who worked within it I use the word Persian in a cultural rather than ethnological sense. In almost all the territories which Temür incorporated into his realm Persian was the primary language of administration and literary culture. Thus the language of the settled 'diwan' was Persian and its scribes had to be thoroughly adept in Persian culture, whatever their ethnic origin.) Temür's Chaghatay emirs were often involved in civil and provincial administration and even in financial affairs, traditionally the province of Persian bureaucracy." ^ Roy, Olivier (2007). The new Central Asia. I. B. Tauris. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-84511-552-4. ^ "History of the Nestorians". ^ "Iqbal'S Hindu Relations". The Telegraph. Calcutta, India. 30 June 2007. ^ a b Hameed ud-Din (2011). "Ab? ??leb ?osayn?". Encyclopædia Iranica. Retrieved 17 September 2014. ^ Milwright, Marcus (2006). "So Despicable a Vessel: Representations of Tamerlane in Printed Books of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries". Muqarnas. 23: 317. doi:10.1163/22118993-90000105. ^ a b c Knobler, Adam (November 1995). "The Rise of Timur and Western Diplomatic Response, 1390–1405". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. Third Series. 5 (3): 341–349. doi:10.1017/s135618630000660x. ^ ad-D?n?Al? Yazd?, Sharaf (1723). The History of Timur-Bec. 1. pp. xii–ix. Punctuation and spelling modernized. ^ Lev Vasil'evich Oshanin (1964). Anthropological composition of the population of Central Asia: and the ethnogenesis of its peoples. 2. Peabody Museum. p. 39. ^ Berna Özcan, Gül (2018). Diverging Paths of Development in Central Asia. Routledge. ISBN 978-1351739429. ^ Yah, Lim Chong (2001). Southeast Asia: The Long Road Ahead. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Company. p. 3. ISBN 978-981-310-584-3. ^ Russian Translation Series of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology. Harvard University. 1964. ^ Mikhail Mikhailovich Gerasimov (1971). The face finder. Hutchinson. p. 135. ISBN 978-0-09-105510-3. ^ Congress, United States. Congressional Record: Proceedings and Debates of the United States Congress. U.S. Government Printing Office. p. A7238. ^ Blanc, Pauline (2 October 2009). Selfhood on the Early Modern English Stage. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 72. ISBN 9781443815628. ^ "Uzbekistan: On the bloody trail of Tamerlane". The Independent. London. 9 July 2006. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Retrieved 17 April 2016.CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) ^ "Facial Reconstruction, Nazis, and Siberia: The story of Mikhail Gerasimov". 25 January 2011. Retrieved 9 November 2020. ^ Mark & Ruth Dickens. "Timurid Architecture in Samarkand". Oxuscom.com. Retrieved 22 May 2012. ^ Marozzi 2004 ^ "Näsimi (1973)". IMDb. Retrieved 31 August 2020. ^ Enrique Serrano (2 January 2011). Tamerlan (Biblioteca Breve) (Spanish ed.). ISBN 9789584205407. ^ "Day Watch—Full Cast & Crew". IMDb. Retrieved 31 August 2020. ^ "John Fletcher Radio Plays & Dramatisations". suttonelms.org. Retrieved 31 August 2020. ^ "Age of Empires 2: Definitive Edition review". PC Gamer. 12 November 2019. References Knobler, Adam (1995). "The Rise of T?m?r and Western Diplomatic Response, 1390–1405". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. Third Series. 5 (3): 341–349. doi:10.1017/S135618630000660X. Knobler, Adam (2001). "Timur the (Terrible/Tartar) Trope: a Case of Repositioning in Popular Literature and History". Medieval Encounters. 7 (1): 101–112. doi:10.1163/157006701X00102. Manz, Beatrice Forbes (1999). The Rise and Rule of Tamerlane. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521633840. May, Timothy. "Timur ("the Lame")(1336–1405)". The Encyclopedia of War. Nicol, Donald M. (1993). The Last Centuries of Byzantium, 1261-1453. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521439916. Melville, Charles (2020). The Timurid Century: The Idea of Iran Vol.9. University of Cambridge, English: Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 9781838606152. Tsai, Shih-Shan Henry (2002). Perpetual Happiness: the Ming Emperor Yongle. Seattle: University of Washington Press. ISBN 9780295981246. OCLC 870409962.  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Goldsmid, Frederic John (1911). "Tim?r". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 994–995. Further reading Abazov, Rafis. "Timur (Tamerlane) and the Timurid Empire in Central Asia." The Palgrave Concise Historical Atlas of Central Asia. Palgrave Macmillan US, 2008. 56–57. Lamb, Harold (1929). Tamerlane: The Earth Shaker (Hardback). London: Thorndon Butterworth. Marlowe, Christopher. Tamburlaine the Great. Ed. J. S. Cunningham. Manchester University Press, Manchester 1981. Manz, Beatrice Forbes. "Temür and the Problem of a Conqueror's Legacy," Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Third Series, Vol. 8, No. 1 (Apr. 1998) Marozzi, Justin. Tamerlane: sword of Islam, conqueror of the world, London: HarperCollins, 2004 Marozzi, Justin. "Tamerlane", in: The Art of War: great commanders of the ancient and medieval world, Andrew Roberts (editor), London: Quercus Military History, 2008. ISBN 978-1-84724-259-4 Novosel'tsev, A. P. "On the Historical Evaluation of Tamerlane." Soviet studies in history 12.3 (1973): 37–70. Shterenshis, Michael V. "Approach to Tamerlane: Tradition and Innovation." Central Asia and the Caucasus 2 (2000). Sykes, P. M. "Tamerlane" Journal of the Central Asian Society 2.1 (1915): 17–33. YÜKSEL, Musa ?amil. "Timur’un Yükseli?i ve Bat?’n?n Diplomatik Cevab?, 1390–1405." Selçuk Üniversitesi Türkiyat Ara?t?rmalar? Dergisi 1.18 (2005): 231–243. External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Timur. Forbes, Andrew, & Henley, David: Timur's Legacy: The Architecture of Bukhara and Samarkand (CPA Media) Narrative of the Embassy of Ruy Gonzalez De Clavijo to the Court of Timour, at Samarcand, A.D.1403-6 – Full text at Google Books. Ruy González de Clavijo, Embassy to Tamerlane, 1403–1406, translated by Guy Le Strange, with a new Introduction by Caroline Stone (Hardinge Simpole, 2009). Nationality or Religion: Views of Central Asian Islam Timur Timurid dynasty Preceded by None Timurid Empire 1370–1405 Succeeded by Pir Muhammad ibn Jahangir and Khalil Sultan v t e Timurid Empire Emperors Timur Pir Muhammad ibn Jahangir Khalil Sultan Shah Rukh Ulugh Beg Abdal-Latif Mirza Abdallah Mirza Sultan Muhammad bin Baysonqor Abul-Qasim Babur Mirza Abu Sa'id Mirza Sultan Ahmed Mirza Sultan Mahmud Mirza Mirza Shah Mahmud Ibrahim Mirza bin Ala-ud-Daulah Sultan Husayn Mirza Bayqara Yadgar Muhammad Mirza Badi' al-Zaman Mirza Battles and conflicts Siege of Balkh (1370) Tokhtamysh–Timur war Battle of the Kondurcha River (1391) Battle of the Terek River(1395) Invasions of Georgia (1386-1403) Battle of Qara-Derrah Pass (1395) Battle of Algami Canal (1402) Battle of Ankara (1402) Battle of Nakhchivan (1406) Siege of Shahrukhiya (1461) Battle of Qarabagh(1469) Battle of the Chirciq River (1488) Siege of Samarkand (1497) Battle of Sar-e-Pul (1501) Siege of Samarkand (1501) Siege of Kabul (1504) Battle of Ab Darrah Pass (1511) Battle of Ghazdewan (1512) Battle of Qalat-i-Ghilzai (1505) Battle of Bajaur (1519) Timurid wars of succession Siege of Balkh (1447) Battle of Damghan (1447) Battle of Nishapur (1447) Battle of Tarnab (1448) Occupation of Balkh (1447) Siege of Herat (1448) Revolt of Abdal-Latif Mirza (1449) Siege of Balkh (1447) Siege of Herat (1448) Battle of Farhadgerd (1449) Urdu Bazar Revolt (1447) Battle of Sarakhs (1459) Siege of Samarkand (1494) Battle of Akhsi (1502-03) Architecture Mausoleum of Khoja Ahmed Yasawi Bibi-Khanym Mosque Registan of Samarkand Gur-e-Amir Shakhrisabz Dorut Tilavat Ulugh Beg Madrasa Ulugh Beg Observatory Shah-i-Zinda Herat Musalla Complex Minarets Great Mosque of Herat Goharshad Mosque Blue Mosque of Mazar-i-Sharif Green Mosque Khanqah of Baha ad-Din Naqshbandi See also Persianate Turco-Mongol tradition Turco-Persian tradition Indo-Persian tradition Timurid dynasty family tree Timurid art Timurid Renaissance Timurid relations with Europe Mughal Empire v t e Ottoman Interregnum Background Rise of the Ottoman Empire Murad I Bayezid I Siege of Constantinople (1394–1402) Crusade of Nicopolis Timur Battle of Ankara Events Siege of Smyrna Battle of Tripolje Treaty of Gallipoli Battle of Ermeni-beli Battle of Ulubad Battle of Karasi Battle of Kosmidion Battle of Edirne Siege of Constantinople (1411) Treaty of Selymbria Battle of ?nce?iz Battle of Çamurlu Ottoman princes and leaders Mehmed I Süleyman Çelebi ?sa Çelebi Musa Çelebi Mustafa Çelebi Çandarl?zade Ali Pasha Imamzade Halil Pasha Bayezid Pasha Evrenos Pasha Yi?it Bey Mihalo?lu Mehmed Bey Turahan Bey Sheikh Bedreddin Neighbouring rulers and leaders Junayd Bey (Ayd?n) Manuel II Palaiologos (Byzantine Empire) John VII Palaiologos (Byzantine Empire) Demetrios Laskaris Leontares (Byzantine Empire) Nasireddin Mehmed Bey (Dulkadir) Yakup II (Germiyan) Philibert de Naillac (Hospitallers) Íñigo de Alfaro (Hospitallers) ?sfendiyar Bey Mehmed II (Karaman) Stefan Lazarevi? (Serbia) ?ura? Brankovi? (Serbia) Vuk Lazarevi? (Serbia) Mircea I (Wallachia) Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) ISNI 1 VIAF 1 WorldCat National libraries Chile Spain France (data) Catalonia United States Latvia Japan Czech Republic Australia Greece Israel Korea Netherlands Poland Sweden Vatican Scientific databases CiNii (Japan) Other Faceted Application of Subject Terminology RERO (Switzerland) 1 Social Networks and Archival Context SUDOC (France) 1 Encyclopedia of Islam Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timur&oldid=1056362493" Categories: Timur Timurid dynasty 1336 births 1405 deaths Muslim monarchs Samarkand Royalty and nobility with disabilities Founding monarchs Hidden categories: Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Chagatay-language text CS1 maint: uses authors parameter Harv and Sfn no-target errors CS1 maint: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from November 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Articles containing Turkish-language text Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNC identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with CANTIC identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NLI identifiers Articles with NLK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with SELIBR identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with CINII identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with RERO identifiers Articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Articles with TDV?A identifiers Articles with WORLDCATID identifiers AC with 26 elements Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch ???? ??????? Aragonés ?????????????? Asturianu Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg ?????? Català ??????? ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ??????? ??? ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? Íslenska Italiano ????? Kab?y? ????? ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latina Latviešu ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ????? ???? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? ???? Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Q?r?mtatarca Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? ????????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Ti?ng Vi?t Võro ?? Winaray ?? ?????? ?? Zazaki Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 21 November 2021, at 09:40 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timur Timur - Wikipedia Timur From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search 14th-century Turco-Mongol military leader and conqueror; founder of the Timurid Empire Not to be confused with Timor. "Tamerlane" and "Tamerlan" redirect here. For the poem, see Tamerlane (poem). For people named Tamerlan, see Tamerlan (given name). For other uses, see Timur (disambiguation). Timur Beg Sultan[1] Timur facial reconstruction from skull, by Mikhail Mikhaylovich Gerasimov Amir of the Timurid Empire Reign 9 April 1370 – 14 February 1405 Coronation 9 April 1370, Balkh[2] Predecessor Amir Hussain (as the ruler of Transoxiana) Successor Khalil Sultan Born 9 April 1336[2] Kesh, Chagatai Khanate (now Shahrisabz, Uzbekistan) Died 18 February 1405(1405-02-18) (aged 68) Farab, Timurid Empire (now Otrar, Kazakhstan) Burial Gur-e-Amir, Samarkand, Uzbekistan Consort Saray Mulk Khanum Wives Chulpan Mulk Agha Aljaz Turkhan Agha Tukal Khanum Dil Shad Agha Touman Agha Other wives Issue Detail Umar Shaikh Mirza I Jahangir Mirza Miran Shah Shah Rukh Mirza Names Shuja-ud-din Timur[3] Dynasty Timurid Father Amir Taraghai Mother Tekina Khatun Religion Sunni Islam v t e Timurid conquests and invasions Central Asia Balkh Persia Isfahan Tokhtamysh–Timur war Kondurcha River Caucasus Tbilisi; Birtvisi India Delhi Levant Aleppo; Damascus Anatolia Ankara; Smyrna Timur[a] (Chagatay: ????? Temür, lit. 'Iron'; 9 April 1336 – 17–19 February 1405), later Tim?r Gurk?n?[b] (Chagatay: ????? ????? Temür Küregen),[8] was a Turco-Mongol conqueror who founded the Timurid Empire in and around modern-day Afghanistan, Iran and Central Asia, becoming the first ruler of the Timurid dynasty. As an undefeated commander, he is widely regarded as one of the greatest military leaders and tacticians in history.[9][10] Timur is also considered a great patron of art and architecture as he interacted with intellectuals such as Ibn Khaldun and Hafiz-i Abru and his reign introduced the Timurid Renaissance.[9]:?341–2? Born into the Barlas confederation in Transoxiana (in modern-day Uzbekistan) on 9 April 1336, Timur gained control of the western Chagatai Khanate by 1370. From that base, he led military campaigns across Western, South and Central Asia, the Caucasus, and Southern Russia, and emerged as the most powerful ruler in the Muslim world after defeating Golden Horde, the Mamluks of Egypt and Syria, the emerging Ottoman Empire, and the declining Delhi Sultanate of India.[11] From these conquests, he founded the Timurid Empire, but this empire fragmented shortly after his death. Timur was the last of the great nomadic conquerors of the Eurasian Steppe, and his empire set the stage for the rise of the more structured and lasting Islamic gunpowder empires in the 16th and 17th centuries.[12][13][14] Timur was of both Turkic and Mongol descent, and, while unlikely a direct descendant on either side, he shared a common ancestor with Genghis Khan on his father's side,[15][16][17] while other authors have suggested that his mother might have been a descendant of Khan.[18][19] He clearly sought to invoke the legacy of the latter's conquests during his lifetime.[20] Timur envisioned the restoration of the Mongol Empire of Genghis Khan (died 1227) and according to Gérard Chaliand, saw himself as Genghis Khan's heir.[21] According to Beatrice Forbes Manz, "in his formal correspondence Temur continued throughout his life to portray himself as the restorer of Chinggisid rights. He justified his Iranian, Mamluk, and Ottoman campaigns as a re-imposition of legitimate Mongol control over lands taken by usurpers."[22] To legitimize his conquests, Timur relied on Islamic symbols and language, referred to himself as the "Sword of Islam". He was a patron of educational and religious institutions. He converted nearly all the Borjigin leaders to Islam during his lifetime. Timur decisively defeated the Christian Knights Hospitaller at the Siege of Smyrna, styling himself a ghazi.[9]:?91? By the end of his reign, Timur had gained complete control over all the remnants of the Chagatai Khanate, the Ilkhanate, and the Golden Horde, and even attempted to restore the Yuan dynasty in China. Timur's armies were inclusively multi-ethnic and were feared throughout Asia, Africa, and Europe,[9] sizable parts of which his campaigns laid waste.[23] Scholars estimate that his military campaigns caused the deaths of 17 million people, amounting to about 5% of the world population at the time.[24][25] Of all the areas he conquered, Khwarazm suffered the most from his expeditions, as it rose several times against him.[26] Timur was the grandfather of the Timurid sultan, astronomer and mathematician Ulugh Beg, who ruled Central Asia from 1411 to 1449, and the great-great-great-grandfather of Babur (1483–1530), founder of the Mughal Empire, which then ruled almost all of the Indian subcontinent.[27][28] Contents 1 Ancestry 2 Early life 3 Military leader 4 Rise to power 5 Legitimization of Timur's rule 6 Period of expansion 7 Conquest of Persia 7.1 Tokhtamysh–Timur war 7.2 Ismailis 8 Campaign against the Tughlaq dynasty 8.1 Capture of Delhi (1398) 9 Campaigns in the Levant 10 Invasion of Anatolia 11 Attempts to attack the Ming dynasty 12 Death 13 Succession 14 Wives and concubines 15 Descendants 15.1 Sons of Timur 15.2 Daughters of Timur 15.3 Sons of Umar Shaikh Mirza I 15.4 Sons of Jahangir 15.5 Sons of Miran Shah 15.6 Sons of Shah Rukh Mirza 16 Religious views 17 Personality 18 Exchanges with Europe 19 Legacy 19.1 Historical sources 19.1.1 Malfuzat-i Timuri 19.2 European views 19.3 Exhumation and alleged curse 19.4 In the arts 20 Examples of Timurid architecture 21 See also 22 Notes 23 References 24 Further reading 25 External links Ancestry Genealogical relationship between Timur and Genghis Khan Through his father, Timur claimed to be a descendant of Tumanay Khan, a male-line ancestor he shared with Genghis Khan.[17] Tumanay's great-great grandson Qarachar Noyan was a minister for the emperor who later assisted the latter's son Chagatai in the governorship of Transoxiana.[29][30] Though there are not many mentions of Qarachar in 13th and 14th century records, later Timurid sources greatly emphasised his role in the early history of the Mongol Empire.[31][32] These histories also state that Genghis Khan later established the "bond of fatherhood and sonship" by marrying Chagatai's daughter to Qarachar.[33] Through his alleged descent from this marriage, Timur claimed kinship with the Chagatai Khans.[34] The origins of Timur's mother, Tekina Khatun, are less clear. The Zafarnama merely states her name without giving any information regarding her background. Writing in 1403, Johannes de Galonifontibus, Archbishop of Sultaniyya, claimed that she was of lowly origin.[29] The Mu'izz al-Ansab, written decades later, says that she was related to the Yasa'uri tribe, whose lands bordered that of the Barlas.[35] Ibn Khaldun recounted that Timur himself described to him his mother's descent from the legendary Persian hero Manuchehr.[36] Ibn Arabshah suggested that she was a descendant of Genghis Khan.[19] The 18th century Books of Timur identify her as the daughter of 'Sadr al-Sharia', which is believed to refer to the Hanafi scholar Ubayd Allah al-Mahbubi of Bukhara.[37] Early life Emir Timur feasts in the gardens of Samarkand. Timur was born in Transoxiana near the city of Kesh (modern Shahrisabz, Uzbekistan), some 80 kilometres (50 mi) south of Samarkand, part of what was then the Chagatai Khanate.[38] His name Temur means "Iron" in the Chagatai language, his mother-tongue (cf. Uzbek Temir, Turkish Demir).[39] It is cognate with Genghis Khan's birth name of Temüjin.[40][41] Later Timurid dynastic histories claim that Timur was born on 8 April 1336, but most sources from his lifetime give ages that are consistent with a birthdate in the late 1320s. Historian Beatrice Forbes Manz suspects the 1336 date was designed to tie Timur to the legacy of Abu Sa'id Bahadur Khan, the last ruler of the Ilkhanate descended from Hulagu Khan, who died in that year.[42] He was a member of the Barlas, a Mongolian tribe[43][44] that had been turkified in many aspects.[45][46][47] His father, Taraghai was described as a minor noble of this tribe.[38] However, Manz believes that Timur may have later understated the social position of his father, so as to make his own successes appear more remarkable. She states that though he is not believed to have been especially powerful, Taraghai was reasonably wealthy and influential.[48] This is shown by Timur later returning to his birthplace following the death of his father in 1360, suggesting concern over his estate.[49] Taraghai's social significance is further hinted at by Arabshah, who described him as a magnate in the court of Amir Husayn Qara'unas.[19] In addition to this, the father of the great Amir Hamid Kereyid of Moghulistan is stated as a friend of Taraghai's.[50] In his childhood, Timur and a small band of followers raided travelers for goods, especially animals such as sheep, horses, and cattle.[42]:?116? Around 1363, it is believed that Timur tried to steal a sheep from a shepherd but was shot by two arrows, one in his right leg and another in his right hand, where he lost two fingers. Both injuries crippled him for life. Some believe that Timur suffered his crippling injuries while serving as a mercenary to the khan of Sistan in Khorasan in what is today the Dashti Margo in southwest Afghanistan. Timur's injuries have given him the names of Timur the Lame and Tamerlane by Europeans.[9]:?31? Military leader About 1360, Timur gained prominence as a military leader whose troops were mostly Turkic tribesmen of the region.[21] He took part in campaigns in Transoxiana with the Khan of the Chagatai Khanate. Allying himself both in cause and by family connection with Qazaghan, the dethroner and destroyer of Volga Bulgaria, he invaded Khorasan[51] at the head of a thousand horsemen. This was the second military expedition that he led, and its success led to further operations, among them the subjugation of Khwarezm and Urgench.[52] Following Qazaghan's murder, disputes arose among the many claimants to sovereign power. Tughlugh Timur of Kashgar, the Khan of the Eastern Chagatai Khanate, another descendant of Genghis Khan, invaded, interrupting this infighting. Timur was sent to negotiate with the invader but joined with him instead and was rewarded with Transoxania. At about this time, his father died and Timur also became chief of the Berlas. Tughlugh then attempted to set his son Ilyas Khoja over Transoxania, but Timur repelled this invasion with a smaller force.[51] Rise to power Timur commanding the Siege of Balkh It was in this period that Timur reduced the Chagatai khans to the position of figureheads while he ruled in their name. Also during this period, Timur and his brother-in-law Amir Husayn, who were at first fellow fugitives and wanderers, became rivals and antagonists.[52] The relationship between them became strained after Husayn abandoned efforts to carry out Timur's orders to finish off Ilya Khoja (former governor of Mawarannah) close to Tashkent.[9]:?40? Timur gained followers in Balkh, consisting of merchants, fellow tribesmen, Muslim clergy, aristocracy and agricultural workers, because of his kindness in sharing his belongings with them. This contrasted Timur's behavior with that of Husayn, who alienated these people, took many possessions from them via his heavy tax laws and selfishly spent the tax money building elaborate structures.[9]:?41–2? Around 1370, Husayn surrendered to Timur and was later assassinated, which allowed Timur to be formally proclaimed sovereign at Balkh. He married Husayn's wife Saray Mulk Khanum, a descendant of Genghis Khan, allowing him to become imperial ruler of the Chaghatay tribe.[9] Legitimization of Timur's rule Timur's Turco-Mongolian heritage provided opportunities and challenges as he sought to rule the Mongol Empire and the Muslim world. According to the Mongol traditions, Timur could not claim the title of khan or rule the Mongol Empire because he was not a descendant of Genghis Khan. Therefore, Timur set up a puppet Chaghatay Khan, Suyurghatmish, as the nominal ruler of Balkh as he pretended to act as a "protector of the member of a Chinggisid line, that of Genghis Khan's eldest son, Jochi".[53] Timur instead used the title of Amir meaning general, and acting in the name of the Chagatai ruler of Transoxania.[42]:?106? To reinforce this position, Timur claimed the title Guregen (royal son-in-law) when he married Saray Mulk Khanum, a princess of Chinggisid descent.[7] As with the title of Khan, Timur similarly could not claim the supreme title of the Islamic world, Caliph, because the "office was limited to the Quraysh, the tribe of the Prophet Muhammad". Therefore, Timur reacted to the challenge by creating a myth and image of himself as a "supernatural personal power" ordained by God.[53] Otherwise he was described as a spiritual descendant of Ali, thus taken lineage of both to Genghis Khan and the Quraysh.[54] Period of expansion Timur besieges the historic city of Urganj. Timur spent the next 35 years in various wars and expeditions. He not only consolidated his rule at home by the subjugation of his foes, but sought extension of territory by encroachments upon the lands of foreign potentates. His conquests to the west and northwest led him to the lands near the Caspian Sea and to the banks of the Ural and the Volga. Conquests in the south and south-West encompassed almost every province in Persia, including Baghdad, Karbala and Northern Iraq.[52] One of the most formidable of Timur's opponents was another Mongol ruler, a descendant of Genghis Khan named Tokhtamysh. After having been a refugee in Timur's court, Tokhtamysh became ruler both of the eastern Kipchak and the Golden Horde. After his accession, he quarreled with Timur over the possession of Khwarizm and Azerbaijan.[52] However, Timur still supported him against the Russians and in 1382 Tokhtamysh invaded the Muscovite dominion and burned Moscow.[55] Orthodox tradition states that later, in 1395 Timur, having reached the frontier of Principality of Ryazan, had taken Elets and started advancing towards Moscow. Great Prince Vasily I of Moscow went with an army to Kolomna and halted at the banks of the Oka River. The clergy brought the famed Theotokos of Vladimir icon from Vladimir to Moscow. Along the way people prayed kneeling: "O Mother of God, save the land of Russia!" Suddenly, Timur's armies retreated. In memory of this miraculous deliverance of the Russian land from Timur on 26 August, the all-Russian celebration in honor of the Meeting of the Vladimir Icon of the Most Holy Mother of God was established.[56] Conquest of Persia Timur orders campaign against Georgia. Emir Timur's army attacks the survivors of the town of Nerges, in Georgia, in the spring of 1396. After the death of Abu Sa'id, ruler of the Ilkhanate, in 1335, there was a power vacuum in Persia. In the end, Persia was split amongst the Muzaffarids, Kartids, Eretnids, Chobanids, Injuids, Jalayirids, and Sarbadars. In 1383, Timur started his lengthy military conquest of Persia, though he already ruled over much of Persian Khorasan by 1381, after Khwaja Mas'ud, of the Sarbadar dynasty surrendered. Timur began his Persian campaign with Herat, capital of the Kartid dynasty. When Herat did not surrender he reduced the city to rubble and massacred most of its citizens; it remained in ruins until Shah Rukh ordered its reconstruction around 1415.[57] Timur then sent a General to capture rebellious Kandahar. With the capture of Herat the Kartid kingdom surrendered and became vassals of Timur; it would later be annexed outright less than a decade later in 1389 by Timur's son Miran Shah.[58] Timur then headed west to capture the Zagros Mountains, passing through Mazandaran. During his travel through the north of Persia, he captured the then town of Tehran, which surrendered and was thus treated mercifully. He laid siege to Soltaniyeh in 1384. Khorasan revolted one year later, so Timur destroyed Isfizar, and the prisoners were cemented into the walls alive. The next year the kingdom of Sistan, under the Mihrabanid dynasty, was ravaged, and its capital at Zaranj was destroyed. Timur then returned to his capital of Samarkand, where he began planning for his Georgian campaign and Golden Horde invasion. In 1386, Timur passed through Mazandaran as he had when trying to capture the Zagros. He went near the city of Soltaniyeh, which he had previously captured but instead turned north and captured Tabriz with little resistance, along with Maragha.[59] He ordered heavy taxation of the people, which was collected by Adil Aqa, who was also given control over Soltaniyeh. Adil was later executed because Timur suspected him of corruption.[60] Timur then went north to begin his Georgian and Golden Horde campaigns, pausing his full-scale invasion of Persia. When he returned, he found his generals had done well in protecting the cities and lands he had conquered in Persia.[61] Though many rebelled, and his son Miran Shah, who may have been regent, was forced to annex rebellious vassal dynasties, his holdings remained. So he proceeded to capture the rest of Persia, specifically the two major southern cities of Isfahan and Shiraz. When he arrived with his army at Isfahan in 1387, the city immediately surrendered; he treated it with relative mercy as he normally did with cities that surrendered (unlike Herat).[62] However, after Isfahan revolted against Timur's taxes by killing the tax collectors and some of Timur's soldiers, he ordered the massacre of the city's citizens; the death toll is reckoned at between 100,000 and 200,000.[63] An eye-witness counted more than 28 towers constructed of about 1,500 heads each.[64] This has been described as a "systematic use of terror against towns...an integral element of Tamerlane's strategic element", which he viewed as preventing bloodshed by discouraging resistance. His massacres were selective and he spared the artistic and educated.[63] This would later influence the next great Persian conqueror: Nader Shah.[65] Timur then began a five-year campaign to the west in 1392, attacking Persian Kurdistan.[66][67][68] In 1393, Shiraz was captured after surrendering, and the Muzaffarids became vassals of Timur, though prince Shah Mansur rebelled but was defeated, and the Muzafarids were annexed. Shortly after Georgia was devastated so that the Golden Horde could not use it to threaten northern Iran.[69] In the same year, Timur caught Baghdad by surprise in August by marching there in only eight days from Shiraz. Sultan Ahmad Jalayir fled to Syria, where the Mamluk Sultan Barquq protected him and killed Timur's envoys. Timur left the Sarbadar prince Khwaja Mas'ud to govern Baghdad, but he was driven out when Ahmad Jalayir returned. Ahmad was unpopular but got help from Qara Yusuf of the Kara Koyunlu; he fled again in 1399, this time to the Ottomans.[70] Tokhtamysh–Timur war See also: Karsakpay inscription In the meantime, Tokhtamysh, now khan of the Golden Horde, turned against his patron and in 1385 invaded Azerbaijan. The inevitable response by Timur resulted in the Tokhtamysh–Timur war. In the initial stage of the war, Timur won a victory at the Battle of the Kondurcha River. After the battle Tokhtamysh and some of his army were allowed to escape. After Tokhtamysh's initial defeat, Timur invaded Muscovy to the north of Tokhtamysh's holdings. Timur's army burned Ryazan and advanced on Moscow. He was pulled away before reaching the Oka River by Tokhtamysh's renewed campaign in the south.[71] In the first phase of the conflict with Tokhtamysh, Timur led an army of over 100,000 men north for more than 700 miles into the steppe. He then rode west about 1,000 miles advancing in a front more than 10 miles wide. During this advance, Timur's army got far enough north to be in a region of very long summer days causing complaints by his Muslim soldiers about keeping a long schedule of prayers. It was then that Tokhtamysh's army was boxed in against the east bank of the Volga River in the Orenburg region and destroyed at the Battle of the Kondurcha River, in 1391. In the second phase of the conflict, Timur took a different route against the enemy by invading the realm of Tokhtamysh via the Caucasus region. In 1395, Timur defeated Tokhtamysh in the Battle of the Terek River, concluding the struggle between the two monarchs. Tokhtamysh was unable to restore his power or prestige, and he was killed about a decade later in the area of present-day Tyumen. During the course of Timur's campaigns, his army destroyed Sarai, the capital of the Golden Horde, and Astrakhan, subsequently disrupting the Golden Horde's Silk Road. The Golden Horde no longer held power after their losses to Timur. Ismailis In May 1393, Timur's army invaded the Anjudan, crippling the Ismaili village only a year after his assault on the Ismailis in Mazandaran. The village was prepared for the attack, evidenced by its fortress and system of tunnels. Undeterred, Timur's soldiers flooded the tunnels by cutting into a channel overhead. Timur's reasons for attacking this village are not yet well understood. However, it has been suggested that his religious persuasions and view of himself as an executor of divine will may have contributed to his motivations.[72] The Persian historian Khwandamir explains that an Ismaili presence was growing more politically powerful in Persian Iraq. A group of locals in the region was dissatisfied with this and, Khwandamir writes, these locals assembled and brought up their complaint with Timur, possibly provoking his attack on the Ismailis there.[72] Campaign against the Tughlaq dynasty Timur defeats the Sultan of Delhi, Nasir Al-Din Mahmud Tughluq, in the winter of 1397–1398, painting dated 1595–1600. In 1398, Timur invaded northern India, attacking the Delhi Sultanate ruled by Sultan Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq of the Tughlaq dynasty. After crossing the Indus River on 30 September 1398, he sacked Tulamba and massacred its inhabitants. Then he advanced and captured Multan by October.[73] His invasion was unopposed as most of the Indian nobility surrendered without a fight, however he did encounter resistance from the united army of Rajputs and Muslims at Bhatner[74] under the command of the Rajput king Dulachand,[75] Dulachand initially opposed Timur but when hard-pressed he considered surrender. He was locked outside the walls of Bhatner by his brother and was later killed by Timur. The garrison of Bhatner then fought and were slaughtered to the last man. Bhatner was looted and burned to the ground.[76] While on his march towards Delhi, Timur was opposed by the Jat peasantry, who would loot caravans and then disappear in the forests, Timur had 2,000 Jats killed and many taken captive.[76][77] But the Sultanate at Delhi did nothing to stop his advance.[78][unreliable source?] Capture of Delhi (1398) The battle took place on 17 December 1398. Sultan Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq and the army of Mallu Iqbal[79] had war elephants armored with chain mail and poison on their tusks.[9]:?267? As his Tatar forces were afraid of the elephants, Timur ordered his men to dig a trench in front of their positions. Timur then loaded his camels with as much wood and hay as they could carry. When the war elephants charged, Timur set the hay on fire and prodded the camels with iron sticks, causing them to charge at the elephants, howling in pain: Timur had understood that elephants were easily panicked. Faced with the strange spectacle of camels flying straight at them with flames leaping from their backs, the elephants turned around and stampeded back toward their own lines. Timur capitalized on the subsequent disruption in the forces of Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq, securing an easy victory. Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq fled with remnants of his forces. Delhi was sacked and left in ruins. Before the battle for Delhi, Timur executed 100,000 captives.[28] The capture of the Delhi Sultanate was one of Timur's greatest victories, as at that time, Delhi was one of the richest cities in the world. After Delhi fell to Timur's army, uprisings by its citizens against the Turkic-Mongols began to occur, causing a retaliatory bloody massacre within the city walls. After three days of citizens uprising within Delhi, it was said that the city reeked of the decomposing bodies of its citizens with their heads being erected like structures and the bodies left as food for the birds by Timur's soldiers. Timur's invasion and destruction of Delhi continued the chaos that was still consuming India, and the city would not be able to recover from the great loss it suffered for almost a century.[9]:?269–274? Campaigns in the Levant Timur defeating the Mamluk Sultan Nasir-ad-Din Faraj of Egypt 19th century painting depicting Bayezid I being held captive by Timur. Before the end of 1399, Timur started a war with Bayezid I, sultan of the Ottoman Empire, and the Mamluk sultan of Egypt Nasir-ad-Din Faraj. Bayezid began annexing the territory of Turkmen and Muslim rulers in Anatolia. As Timur claimed sovereignty over the Turkoman rulers, they took refuge behind him. In 1400, Timur invaded Armenia and Georgia. Of the surviving population, more than 60,000 of the local people were captured as slaves, and many districts were depopulated.[80] He also sacked Sivas in Asia Minor.[81] Then Timur turned his attention to Syria, sacking Aleppo,[82] and Damascus.[83] The city's inhabitants were massacred, except for the artisans, who were deported to Samarkand. Timur invaded Baghdad in June 1401. After the capture of the city, 20,000 of its citizens were massacred. Timur ordered that every soldier should return with at least two severed human heads to show him. When they ran out of men to kill, many warriors killed prisoners captured earlier in the campaign, and when they ran out of prisoners to kill, many resorted to beheading their own wives.[84] Invasion of Anatolia Main articles: Battle of Ankara and Ottoman Interregnum In the meantime, years of insulting letters had passed between Timur and Bayezid. Both rulers insulted each other in their own way while Timur preferred to undermine Bayezid's position as a ruler and play down the significance of his military successes. This is the excerpt from one of Timur's letters addressed to Ottoman sultan: "Believe me, you are but pismire ant: don't seek to fight the elephants for they'll crush you under their feet. Shall a petty prince such as you are contend with us? But your rodomontades (braggadocio) are not extraordinary; for a Turcoman never spake with judgement. If you don't follow our counsels you will regret it".[85] Finally, Timur invaded Anatolia and defeated Bayezid in the Battle of Ankara on 20 July 1402. Bayezid was captured in battle and subsequently died in captivity, initiating the twelve-year Ottoman Interregnum period. Timur's stated motivation for attacking Bayezid and the Ottoman Empire was the restoration of Seljuq authority. Timur saw the Seljuks as the rightful rulers of Anatolia as they had been granted rule by Mongol conquerors, illustrating again Timur's interest with Genghizid legitimacy.[citation needed] In December 1402, Timur besieged and took the city of Smyrna, a stronghold of the Christian Knights Hospitalers, thus he referred to himself as ghazi or "Warrior of Islam". A mass beheading was carried out in Smyrna by Timur's soldiers.[86][87][88][89] With the Treaty of Gallipoli in February 1402, Timur was furious with the Genoese and Venetians, as their ships ferried the Ottoman army to safety in Thrace. As Lord Kinross reported in The Ottoman Centuries, the Italians preferred the enemy they could handle to the one they could not.[citation needed] During the early interregnum, Bayezid I's son Mehmed Çelebi acted as Timur's vassal. Unlike other princes, Mehmed minted coins that had Timur's name stamped as "Demur han Gürgân" (????? ??? ??????), alongside his own as "Mehmed bin Bayezid han" (???? ?? ?????? ????).[90][91] This was probably an attempt on Mehmed's part to justify to Timur his conquest of Bursa after the Battle of Ulubad. After Mehmed established himself in Rum, Timur had already begun preparations for his return to Central Asia, and took no further steps to interfere with the status quo in Anatolia.[90] While Timur was still in Anatolia, Qara Yusuf assaulted Baghdad and captured it in 1402. Timur returned to Persia and sent his grandson Abu Bakr ibn Miran Shah to reconquer Baghdad, which he proceeded to do. Timur then spent some time in Ardabil, where he gave Ali Safavi, leader of the Safaviyya, a number of captives. Subsequently, he marched to Khorasan and then to Samarkhand, where he spent nine months celebrating and preparing to invade Mongolia and China.[92] Attempts to attack the Ming dynasty Timur had aligned himself with the remnants of the Northern Yuan dynasty in his attempts to conquer Ming China. The fortress at Jiayu Pass was strengthened due to fear of an invasion by Timur.[93] Timurid Empire at Timur's death in 1405 By 1368, Han Chinese forces had driven the Mongols out of China. The first of the new Ming dynasty's emperors, the Hongwu Emperor, and his son, the Yongle Emperor, produced tributary states of many Central Asian countries. The suzerain-vassal relationship between Ming empire and Timurid existed for a long time. In 1394, Hongwu's ambassadors eventually presented Timur with a letter addressing him as a subject. He had the ambassadors Fu An, Guo Ji, and Liu Wei detained.[94] Neither Hongwu's next ambassador, Chen Dewen (1397), nor the delegation announcing the accession of the Yongle Emperor fared any better. [94] Timur eventually planned to invade China. To this end Timur made an alliance with surviving Mongol tribes based in Mongolia and prepared all the way to Bukhara. Engke Khan sent his grandson Öljei Temür Khan, also known as "Buyanshir Khan" after he converted to Islam while at the court of Timur in Samarkand.[95] Death Timur preferred to fight his battles in the spring. However, he died en route during an uncharacteristic winter campaign. In December 1404, Timur began military campaigns against Ming China and detained a Ming envoy. He suffered illness while encamped on the farther side of the Syr Daria and died at Farab on 17 February 1405,[96] before ever reaching the Chinese border.[97] After his death the Ming envoys such as Fu An and the remaining entourage were released[94] by his grandson Khalil Sultan. Geographer Clements Markham, in his introduction to the narrative of Clavijo's embassy, states that, after Timur died, his body "was embalmed with musk and rose water, wrapped in linen, laid in an ebony coffin and sent to Samarkand, where it was buried".[98] His tomb, the Gur-e-Amir, still stands in Samarkand, though it has been heavily restored in recent years.[99] Succession Main article: Timurid Empire Timur's mausoleum is located in Samarkand, Uzbekistan. Timur had twice previously appointed an heir apparent to succeed him, both of whom he had outlived. The first, his son Jahangir, died of illness in 1376.[100][101]:?51? The second, his grandson Muhammad Sultan, had succumbed to battle wounds in 1403.[102] After the latter's death, Timur did nothing to replace him. It was only when he was on his own death-bed that he appointed Muhammad Sultan's younger brother, Pir Muhammad as his successor.[103] Pir Muhammad was unable to gain sufficient support from his relatives and a bitter civil war erupted amongst Timur's descendants, with multiple princes pursuing their claims. It was not until 1409 that Timur's youngest son, Shah Rukh was able to overcome his rivals and take the throne as Timur's successor.[104] Wives and concubines Timur had forty-three wives and concubines, all of these women were also his consorts. Timur made dozens of women his wives and concubines as he conquered their fathers' or erstwhile husbands' lands.[105] Turmish Agha, mother of Jahangir Mirza, Jahanshah Mirza and Aka Begi; Oljay Turkhan Agha (m. 1357/58), daughter of Amir Mashlah and granddaughter of Amir Qazaghan; Saray Mulk Khanum (m. 1367), widow of Amir Husain, and daughter of Qazan Khan; Islam Agha (m. 1367), widow of Amir Husain, and daughter of Amir Bayan Salduz; Ulus Agha (m. 1367), widow of Amir Husain, and daughter of Amir Khizr Yasuri; Dilshad Agha (m. 1374), daughter of Shams ed-Din and his wife Bujan Agha; Touman Agha (m. 1377), daughter of Amir Musa and his wife Arzu Mulk Agha, daughter of Amir Bayezid Jalayir; Chulpan Mulk Agha, daughter of Haji Beg of Jetah; Tukal Khanum (m. 1397), daughter of Mongol Khan Khizr Khawaja Oglan;[101]:?24–5? Tolun Agha, concubine, and mother of Umar Shaikh Mirza I; Mengli Agha, concubine, and mother of Miran Shah; Toghay Turkhan Agha, lady from the Kara Khitai, widow of Amir Husain, and mother of Shah Rukh; Tughdi Bey Agha, daughter of Aq Sufi Qongirat; Sultan Aray Agha, a Nukuz lady; Malikanshah Agha, a Filuni lady; Khand Malik Agha, mother of Ibrahim Mirza; Sultan Agha, mother of a son who died in infancy; His other wives and concubines included: Dawlat Tarkan Agha, Burhan Agha, Jani Beg Agha, Tini Beg Agha, Durr Sultan Agha, Munduz Agha, Bakht Sultan Agha, Nowruz Agha, Jahan Bakht Agha, Nigar Agha, Ruhparwar Agha, Dil Beg Agha, Dilshad Agha, Murad Beg Agha, Piruzbakht Agha, Khoshkeldi Agha, Dilkhosh Agha, Barat Bey Agha, Sevinch Malik Agha, Arzu Bey Agha, Yadgar Sultan Agha, Khudadad Agha, Bakht Nigar Agha, Qutlu Bey Agha, and another Nigar Agha[citation needed]. Descendants See also: Timurid family tree Sons of Timur Umar Shaikh Mirza I – with Tolun Agha Jahangir Mirza – with Turmish Agha Miran Shah Mirza – with Mengli Agha Shah Rukh Mirza – with Toghay Turkhan Agha Daughters of Timur Aka Begi (died 1382) – by Turmish Agha. Married to Muhammad Beg, son of Amir Musa Tayichiud Sultan Husayn Tayichiud Sultan Bakht Begum (died 1429/30) – by Oljay Turkhan Agha. Married first Muhammad Mirke Apardi, married second, 1389/90, Sulayman Shah Dughlat Sa'adat Sultan – by Dilshad Agha Bikijan – by Mengli Agha Qutlugh Sultan Agha – by Toghay Turkhan Agha[106][107] Sons of Umar Shaikh Mirza I Pir Muhammad Iskandar Rustam Bayqara I Mansur Sultan Husayn Bayqarah Badi' al-Zaman Muhammed Mu'min Muhammad Zaman Mirza Muzaffar Hussein Ibrahim Hussein Sons of Jahangir Muhammad Sultan Mirza Pir Muhammad Sons of Miran Shah Khalil Sultan Abu Bakr Muhammad Mirza Abu Sa'id Mirza Umar Shaikh Mirza II Zahir-ud-din Muhammad Babur the Mughals Jahangir Mirza II Sons of Shah Rukh Mirza Mirza Muhammad Taraghay – better known as Ulugh Beg Abdul-Latif Ghiyath-al-Din Baysunghur Ala al-Dawla Mirza Ibrahim Mirza Sultan Muhammad Yadigar Muhammad Abul-Qasim Babur Mirza Sultan Ibrahim Mirza Abdullah Mirza Mirza Soyurghatmïsh Khan Muhammad Juki Religious views A modern portrait of Timur in Gur-e-Amir, Samarkand. Timur was a practicing Sunni Muslim, possibly belonging to the Naqshbandi school, which was influential in Transoxiana.[108] His chief official religious counsellor and adviser was the Hanafi scholar 'Abdu 'l-Jabbar Khwarazmi. In Tirmidh, he had come under the influence of his spiritual mentor Sayyid Baraka, a leader from Balkh who is buried alongside Timur in Gur-e-Amir.[109][110][111] Timur was known to hold Ali and the Ahl al-Bayt in high regard and has been noted by various scholars for his "pro-Shia" stance. However, he also punished Shias for desecrating the memories of the Sahaba.[112] Timur was also noted for attacking the Shia with Sunni apologism, while at other times he attacked Sunnis on religious ground as well.[113] In contrast, Timur held the Seljuk Sultan Ahmad Sanjar in high regard for attacking the Ismailis at Alamut, while Timur's own attack on Ismailis at Anjudan was equally brutal.[113] Personality A Timurid-era illustration of Timur Timur is regarded as a military genius and as a brilliant tactician with an uncanny ability to work within a highly fluid political structure to win and maintain a loyal following of nomads during his rule in Central Asia. He was also considered extraordinarily intelligent—not only intuitively but also intellectually.[114] In Samarkand and his many travels, Timur, under the guidance of distinguished scholars, was able to learn the Persian, Mongolian, and Turkish languages[9]:?9? (according to Ahmad ibn Arabshah, Timur could not speak Arabic).[115] According to John Joseph Saunders, Timur was "the product of an Islamized and Iranized society", and not steppe nomadic.[116] More importantly, Timur was characterized as an opportunist. Taking advantage of his Turco-Mongolian heritage, Timur frequently used either the Islamic religion or the sharia law, fiqh, and traditions of the Mongol Empire to achieve his military goals or domestic political aims.[9] Timur was a learned king, and enjoyed the company of scholars; he was tolerant and generous to them. He was a contemporary of the Persian poet Hafez, and a story of their meeting explains that Timur summoned Hafiz, who had written a ghazal with the following verse: For the black mole on thy cheek I would give the cities of Samarkand and Bukhara. Timur upbraided him for this verse and said, "By the blows of my well tempered sword I have conquered the greater part of the world to enlarge Samarkand and Bukhara, my capitals and residences; and you, pitiful creature, would exchange these two cities for a mole." Hafez, undaunted, replied, "It is by similar generosity that I have been reduced, as you see, to my present state of poverty." It is reported that the King was pleased by the witty answer and the poet departed with magnificent gifts.[117][118] There is a shared view that Timur's real motive for his campaigns was his imperialistic ambition. However, Timur's following words: "The whole expanse of the inhabited part of the world is not large enough to have two kings" explains that his true desire was "to amaze the world", and through his destructive campaigns, to produce an impression rather than to achieve enduring results. This is supported by the fact that besides Iran, Timur simply plundered the states he invaded with a purpose of enriching his native Samarqand and neglected the conquered areas, which may have resulted in a relatively quick disintegration of his Empire after his death.[119] Timur used Persian expressions in his conversations often, and his motto was the Persian phrase r?st? rust? (????? ????, meaning "truth is safety" or "veritas salus").[115] He is credited with the invention of the Tamerlane chess variant, played on a 10×11 board.[120] Exchanges with Europe Main article: Timurid relations with Europe Letter of Timur to Charles VI of France, 1402, a witness to Timurid relations with Europe. Archives Nationales, Paris. Timur had numerous epistolary and diplomatic exchanges with various European states, especially Spain and France. Relations between the court of Henry III of Castile and that of Timur played an important part in medieval Castilian diplomacy. In 1402, the time of the Battle of Ankara, two Spanish ambassadors were already with Timur: Pelayo de Sotomayor and Fernando de Palazuelos. Later, Timur sent to the court of the Kingdom of León and Castile a Chagatai ambassador named Hajji Muhammad al-Qazi with letters and gifts. In return, Henry III of Castile sent a famous embassy to Timur's court in Samarkand in 1403–06, led by Ruy González de Clavijo, with two other ambassadors, Alfonso Paez and Gomez de Salazar. On their return, Timur affirmed that he regarded the king of Castile "as his very own son". According to Clavijo, Timur's good treatment of the Spanish delegation contrasted with the disdain shown by his host toward the envoys of the "lord of Cathay" (i.e., the Yongle Emperor), the Chinese ruler. Clavijo's visit to Samarkand allowed him to report to the European audience on the news from Cathay (China), which few Europeans had been able to visit directly in the century that had passed since the travels of Marco Polo. The French archives preserve: A 30 July 1402 letter from Timur to Charles VI of France, suggesting that he send traders to Asia. It is written in Persian.[121] A May 1403 letter. This is a Latin transcription of a letter from Timur to Charles VI, and another from Miran Shah, his son, to the Christian princes, announcing their victory over Bayezid I at Smyrna.[122] A copy has been kept of the answer of Charles VI to Timur, dated 15 June 1403.[123] In addition, Byzantine John VII Palaiologos who was a regent during his uncle's absence in the West, sent a Dominican friar in August 1401 to Timur, to pay his respect and propose paying tribute to him instead of the Turks, once he managed to defeat them.[81] Legacy Timur's legacy is a mixed one. While Central Asia blossomed under his reign, other places, such as Baghdad, Damascus, Delhi and other Arab, Georgian, Persian, and Indian cities were sacked and destroyed and their populations massacred. He was responsible for the effective destruction of the Nestorian Christian Church of the East in much of Asia. Thus, while Timur still retains a positive image in Muslim Central Asia, he is vilified by many in Arabia, Iraq, Persia, and India, where some of his greatest atrocities were carried out. However, Ibn Khaldun praises Timur for having unified much of the Muslim world when other conquerors of the time could not.[124] The next great conqueror of the Middle East, Nader Shah, was greatly influenced by Timur and almost re-enacted Timur's conquests and battle strategies in his own campaigns. Like Timur, Nader Shah conquered most of Caucasia, Persia, and Central Asia along with also sacking Delhi. Timur's short-lived empire also melded the Turko-Persian tradition in Transoxiana, and in most of the territories that he incorporated into his fiefdom, Persian became the primary language of administration and literary culture (diwan), regardless of ethnicity.[125] In addition, during his reign, some contributions to Turkic literature were penned, with Turkic cultural influence expanding and flourishing as a result. A literary form of Chagatai Turkic came into use alongside Persian as both a cultural and an official language.[126] Emir Timur and his forces advance against the Golden Horde, Khan Tokhtamysh. Tamerlane virtually exterminated the Church of the East, which had previously been a major branch of Christianity but afterwards became largely confined to a small area now known as the Assyrian Triangle.[127] Timur became a relatively popular figure in Europe for centuries after his death, mainly because of his victory over the Ottoman Sultan Bayezid. The Ottoman armies were at the time invading Eastern Europe and Timur was ironically seen as an ally. Statue of Tamerlane in Uzbekistan. In the background are the ruins of his summer palace in Shahrisabz. Timur is officially recognized as a national hero in Uzbekistan. His monument in Tashkent now occupies the place where Karl Marx's statue once stood. Muhammad Iqbal, a philosopher, poet and politician in British India who is widely regarded as having inspired the Pakistan Movement,[128] composed a notable poem entitled Dream of Timur, the poem itself was inspired by a prayer of the last Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah II:[citation needed] The Sharif of the Hijaz suffers due to the divisive sectarian schisms of his faith, And lo! that young Tatar (Timur) has boldly re-envisioned magnanimous victories of overwhelming conquest. In 1794, Sake Dean Mahomed published his travel book, The Travels of Dean Mahomet. The book begins with the praise of Genghis Khan, Timur, and particularly the first Mughal emperor, Babur. He also gives important details on the then incumbent Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II. Historical sources Ahmad ibn Arabshah's work on the Life of Timur The earliest known history of his reign was Nizam ad-Din Shami's Zafarnama, which was written during Timur's lifetime. Between 1424 and 1428, Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi wrote a second Zafarnama drawing heavily on Shami's earlier work. Ahmad ibn Arabshah wrote a much less favorable history in Arabic. Arabshah's history was translated into Latin by the Dutch Orientalist Jacobus Golius in 1636. As Timurid-sponsored histories, the two Zafarnamas present a dramatically different picture from Arabshah's chronicle. William Jones remarked that the former presented Timur as a "liberal, benevolent and illustrious prince" while the latter painted him as "deformed and impious, of a low birth and detestable principles".[52] Malfuzat-i Timuri The Malfuzat-i Timur? and the appended Tuz?k-i T?m?r?, supposedly Timur's own autobiography, are almost certainly 17th-century fabrications.[28][129] The scholar Abu Taleb Hosayni presented the texts to the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan, a distant descendant of Timur, in 1637–38, supposedly after discovering the Chagatai language originals in the library of a Yemeni ruler. Due to the distance between Yemen and Timur's base in Transoxiana and the lack of any other evidence of the originals, most historians consider the story highly implausible, and suspect Hosayni of inventing both the text and its origin story.[129] European views Timur arguably had a significant impact on the Renaissance culture and early modern Europe.[130] His achievements both fascinated and horrified Europeans from the fifteenth century to the early nineteenth century. European views of Timur were mixed throughout the fifteenth century, with some European countries calling him an ally and others seeing him as a threat to Europe because of his rapid expansion and brutality.[131]:?341? When Timur captured the Ottoman Sultan Bayezid at Ankara, he was often praised and seen as a trusted ally by European rulers, such as Charles VI of France and Henry IV of England, because they believed he was saving Christianity from the Turkic Empire in the Middle East. Those two kings also praised him because his victory at Ankara allowed Christian merchants to remain in the Middle East and allowed for their safe return home to both France and England. Timur was also praised because it was believed that he helped restore the right of passage for Christian pilgrims to the Holy Land.[131]:?341–44? Other Europeans viewed Timur as a barbaric enemy who presented a threat to both European culture and the religion of Christianity. His rise to power moved many leaders, such as Henry III of Castile, to send embassies to Samarkand to scout out Timur, learn about his people, make alliances with him, and try to convince him to convert to Christianity in order to avoid war.[131]:?348–49? In the introduction to a 1723 translation of Yazdi's Zafarnama, the translator wrote:[132] [M. Petis de la Croix] tells us, that there are calumnies and impostures, which have been published by authors of romances, and Turkish writers who were his enemies, and envious at his glory: among whom is Ahmed Bin Arabschah ... As Timur-Bec had conquered the Turks and Arabians of Syria, and had even taken the Sultan Bajazet prisoner, it is no wonder that he has been misrepresented by the historians of those nations, who, in despite of truth, and against the dignity of history, have fallen into great excesses on this subject. Exhumation and alleged curse A wax statue of Timur made in Turkey Timur's body was exhumed from his tomb on 19 June 1941 and his remains examined by the Soviet anthropologists Mikhail M. Gerasimov, Lev V. Oshanin and V. Ia. Zezenkova. Gerasimov reconstructed the likeness of Timur from his skull and found that his facial characteristics displayed "typical Mongoloid features" (the correct modern classification term being changed to East Asian).[133][134][135] An anthropologic study of Timur's cranium shows that he belonged predominately to the South Siberian Mongoloid type.[136] At 5 feet 8 inches (173 centimeters), Timur was tall for his era. The examinations confirmed that Timur was lame and had a withered right arm due to his injuries. His right thighbone had knitted together with his kneecap, and the configuration of the knee joint suggests that he had kept his leg bent at all times and therefore would have had a pronounced limp.[137] He appears to have been broad-chested and his hair and beard were red.[138][139] It is alleged that Timur's tomb was inscribed with the words, "When I rise from the dead, the world shall tremble." It is also said that when Gerasimov exhumed the body, an additional inscription inside the casket was found, which read, "Whomsoever [sic] opens my tomb shall unleash an invader more terrible than I."[140] Even though people close to Gerasimov claim that this story is a fabrication, the legend persists.[141] In any case, three days after Gerasimov began the exhumation, Adolf Hitler launched Operation Barbarossa, the largest military invasion of all time, upon the Soviet Union.[142] Timur was re-buried with full Islamic ritual in November 1942 just before the Soviet victory at the Battle of Stalingrad.[143] In the arts Tamburlaine the Great, Parts I and II (English, 1563–1594): play by Christopher Marlowe Tamerlan ou la mort de Bajazet [Tamerlane or the Death of Bajazet] (1675): play by Jacques Pradon. Tamerlane (1701): play by Nicholas Rowe (English) Tamerlano (1724): opera by George Frideric Handel, in Italian, based on the 1675 Pradon play. Bajazet (1735): opera by Antonio Vivaldi, portrays the capture of Bayezid I by Timur. Il gran Tamerlano (1772): opera by Josef Myslivecek which also portrays the capture of Bayezid I by Timur. Timour the Tartar (1811): equestrian drama by Matthew Lewis Tamerlane (published 1827): first published poem of Edgar Allan Poe. Turandot (1924): opera by Giacomo Puccini (libretto by Giuseppe Adami and Renato Simoni) in which Timur is the deposed, blind former King of Tartary and father of the protagonist Calaf. Lord of Samarkand (The Lame Man; published 1932): story by Robert E. Howard in which Timour appears. Nesimi (1973): Azerbaijani film in which Timur was portrayed by Yusif Veliyev.[144] Tamerlan (2003): Spanish-language novel by Colombian writer Enrique Serrano[145] Day Watch (2006): Russian film in which Tamerlane in his youth is portrayed by Emir Baygazin, and in maturity by Gani Kulzhanov.[146] Tamburlaine: Shadow of God (broadcast 2008): a BBC Radio 3 play by John Fletcher presenting a fictitious encounter between Tamburlaine, Ibn Khaldun, and Hafez.[147] Age of Empires II: Definitive Edition (2019): a video game containing a six-chapter campaign titled "Tamerlane".[148] Examples of Timurid architecture Geometric courtyard surrounding the tomb showing the Iwan, and dome. View of the Registan. Timurid Mosque in Herat. Goharshad Mosque Green Mosque (Balkh) is a Timurid mosque that inspired Shah Jahan. Bibi-Khanym Mosque Mausoleum of Khoja Ahmed Yasawi Deep niches and diverse muqarnas decorate the inside of the Gur-e Amir. Shakh-i Zindeh mosque, Samarkand See also Global Empire Muslim conquest in the Indian subcontinent Timuri Timurid conquests and invasions Timurlengia Notes ^ /t??m??r/  • Sometimes spelled Taimur or Temur.  • Historically best known as Amir Timur, Tamerlane[4] (Persian: ????? ???? Tem?r(-i) Lang; Chagatay: ????? ????? Aqsaq Temür,[5] lit. 'Timur the Lame') or as Sahib-i-Qiran (lit. 'Lord of the Auspicious Conjunction'), his epithet.[6] ^ To legitimize his rule, Timur claimed the title Guregen (lit. 'royal son-in-law') when he married Saray Mulk Khanum, a princess of Chinggisid descent.[7] ^ Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. 9. Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. 1847. p. 377. ^ a b Muntakhab-al Lubab, Khafi Khan Nizam-ul-Mulki, Vol I, p. 49. Printed in Lahore, 1985 ^ W. M. Thackston, A Century of Princes: Sources on Timurid History and Art, (1989), p.239 ^ /?tæm?rle?n/ ^ Johanson, Lars (1998). The Turkic Languages. Routledge. p. 27. ISBN 0-415-08200-5. ^ ?In?yat Kh?n, Mu?ammad ??hir ?šn? ?In?yat ??n (1990). The Shah Jahan Nama of 'Inayat Khan: An Abridged History of the Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan, Compiled by His Royal Librarian: the Nineteenth-century Manuscript Translation of A.R. Fuller (British Library, Add. 30,777. Oxford University Press. pp. 11–17.CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link) ^ a b Manz 1999, p. 14. ^ Heissig, Walther; Sagaster, Klaus (1989). Gedanke und Wirkung: Festschrift zum 90. Geburtstag von Nikolaus Poppe. p. 115. ISBN 9783447028936. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Marozzi, Justin (2004). Tamerlane: Sword of Islam, conqueror of the world. HarperCollins. ^ Josef W. Meri (2005). Medieval Islamic Civilization. Routledge. p. 812. ISBN 9780415966900. ^ "Counterview: Taimur's actions were uniquely horrific in Indian history". ^ Darwin, John (2008). After Tamerlane: the rise and fall of global empires, 1400–2000. Bloomsbury Press. pp. 29, 92. ISBN 978-1-59691-760-6. ^ Manz 1999, p. 1. ^ Marozzi, Justin (2006). Tamerlane: Sword of Islam, Conqueror of the World. Da Capo Press. p. 342. ISBN 978-0-306-81465-5. ^ Donald M. Seekins, Richard F. Nyrop (1986). Afghanistan A Country Study · Volume 550, Issues 65-986. The Studies. p. 11. ISBN 9780160239298 – via University of California. Timur was of both Turkish and Mongol descent and claimed Genghis Khan as an ancestorCS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link) ^ International Association for Mongol Studies; Secretariat, Kokusai K?ry? Kikin; Unesco (2002). Eighth International Congress of Mongolists being convened under the patronage of N. Bagabandi, president of Mongolia. OUMSKh-ny Nari?n bichgi?n darga naryn gazar. p. 377 – via Indiana University. First of all, Timur's genealogy gives him a common ancestor with Chinggis Khan in Tumbinai - sechen or Tumanay KhanCS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link) ^ a b Woods, John E. (2002). Timur and Chinggis Khan. Eighth International Congress of Mongolists being convened under the patronage of N. Bagabandi, president of Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar: OUMSKh-ny Nari?n bichgi?n darga naryn gazar. p. 377. ^ Henry Cabot Lodge (1916). The History of Nations Volume 14. P. F. Collier & son. p. 46. ISBN 9780160239298 – via University of Minnesota. Timur the Lame, from the effects of an early wound, a name which some European writers have converted into Tamerlane, or Tamberlaine. He was of Mongol origin, and a direct descendant, by the mother's side, of Genghis Khan ^ a b c Ahmad ibn Arabshah; McChesney, Robert D. (2017). Tamerlane: The Life of the Great Amir. Translated by M. M. Khorramia. Bloomsbury Academic. p. 4. ISBN 978-1-78453-170-6. ^ Richard C. Martin, Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim World A-L, Macmillan Reference USA, 2004, ISBN 978-0-02-865604-5, p. 134. ^ a b Gérard Chaliand, Nomadic Empires: From Mongolia to the Danube translated by A.M. Berrett, Transaction Publishers, 2004. translated by A.M. Berrett. Transaction Publishers, p.75. ISBN 0-7658-0204-X. Limited preview at Google Books. p. 75., ISBN 0-7658-0204-X, p.75., "Timur Leng (Tamerlane) Timur, known as the lame (1336–1405) was a Muslim Turk. He aspired to recreate the empire of his ancestors. He was a military genius who loved to play chess in his spare time to improve his military tactics and skill. And although he wielded absolute power, he never called himself more than an emir.", "Timur Leng (Tamerlane) Timur, known as the lame (1336–1405) was a Muslim Turk from the Umus of Chagatai who saw himself as Genghis Khan's heir." ^ Forbes Manz, Beatrice (April 1998). "Temür and the Problem of a Conqueror's Legacy". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. Third. 8 (1): 21–41. doi:10.1017/S1356186300016412. JSTOR 25183464. ^ Matthew White: Atrocitology: Humanity's 100 Deadliest Achievements, Canongate Books, 2011, ISBN 9780857861252, section "Timur" ^ "The Rehabilitation of Tamerlane". Chicago Tribune. 17 January 1999. ^ J.J. Saunders, The history of the Mongol conquests (page 174), Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1971, ISBN 0812217667 ^ Barthold, V.V. (1962). Four studies on the History of Central Asia, vol. 1 (Second Printing, 1962 ed.). Leiden, E.J.Brill. p. 61. ^ "Timur". Encyclopædia Britannica, Online Academic Edition. 2007. ^ a b c Beatrice F. Manz (2000). "T?m?r Lang". Encyclopaedia of Islam. 10 (2nd ed.). Brill. Retrieved 24 April 2014. ^ a b Woods, John E. (1990). Martin Bernard Dickson; Michel M. Mazzaoui; Vera Basch Moreen (eds.). "Timur's Genealogy". Intellectual Studies on Islam: Essays Written in Honor of Martin B. Dickson. University of Utah Press: 97. ISBN 978-0-87480-342-6. ^ Mackenzie, Franklin (1963). The Ocean and the Steppe: The Life and Times of the Mongol Conqueror Genghis Khan, 1155-1227. Vantage Press. p. 322. ^ Woods (1990, p. 90) ^ Woods, John E. (1991). The Timurid dynasty. Indiana University, Research Institute for Inner Asian Studies. p. 9. ^ Haidar, Mansura (2004). Indo-Central Asian Relations: From Early Times to Medieval Period. Manohar. p. 126. ISBN 978-81-7304-508-0. ^ Keene, H. G. (2001) [1878]. The Turks in India. Honolulu: University Press of the Pacific. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-89875-534-3. ^ Manz 1999, pp. 164–65. ^ Fischel, Walter J. (1952). Ibn Khaldun and Tamerlane. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. p. 37. ^ Sela, Ron (2011). The Legendary Biographies of Tamerlane: Islam and Heroic Apocrypha in Central Asia. Cambridge University Press. p. 27. ISBN 978-1-139-49834-0. ^ a b "Tamerlane". AsianHistory. Retrieved 1 November 2013. ^ Richard Peters, The Story of the Turks: From Empire to Democracy (1959), p. 24 ^ Glassé, Cyril (2001). The new encyclopedia of Islam (Rev. ed.). Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press. ISBN 0-7591-0189-2. OCLC 48553252. ^ Sinor, Denis (1 March 1990), "Introduction: the concept of Inner Asia", The Cambridge History of Early Inner Asia, Cambridge University Press, pp. 1–18, doi:10.1017/chol9780521243049.002, ISBN 978-0-521-24304-9, retrieved 6 April 2021 ^ a b c Manz, Beatrice Forbes (1988). "Tamerlane and the symbolism of sovereignty". Iranian Studies. 21 (1–2): 105–122. doi:10.1080/00210868808701711. JSTOR 4310596. ^ "Central Asia, history of Timur", in Encyclopædia Britannica, Online Edition, 2007. (Quotation:"Under his leadership, Timur united the Mongol tribes located in the basins of the two rivers.") ^ "Islamic world", in Encyclopædia Britannica, Online Edition, 2007. Quotation: "Timur (Tamerlane) was of Mongol descent and he aimed to restore Mongol power." ^ Carter V. Findley, The Turks in World History, Oxford University Press, 2005, Oxford University Press, 2005, ISBN 978-0-19-517726-8, p. 101. ^ G. R. Garthwaite, The Persians, Malden, ISBN 978-1-55786-860-2, MA: Blackwell Pub., 2007. (p.148) Quotation: "Timur's tribe, the Barlas, had Mongol origins but had become Turkic-speaking ... However, the Barlus tribe is considered one of the original Mongol tribes and there are "Barlus Ovogton" people who belong to Barlus tribe in modern Mongolia." ^ M.S. Asimov & Clifford Edmund Bosworth, History of Civilizations of Central Asia, UNESCO Regional Office, 1998, ISBN 92-3-103467-7, p. 320: "One of his followers was [...] Timur of the Barlas tribe. This Mongol tribe had settled [...] in the valley of Kashka Darya, intermingling with the Turkic population, adopting their religion (Islam) and gradually giving up its own nomadic ways, like a number of other Mongol tribes in Transoxania ..." ^ Beatrice Forbes Manz, Tamerlane and the Symbolism of Sovereignty (1988), p. 116 ^ Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi, Zafarnama (1424–1428), p. 35 ^ Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi, Zafarnama (1424–1428), p. 75 ^ a b Ian C. Hannah (1900). A brief history of eastern Asia. T.F. Unwin. p. 92. Retrieved 30 December 2015. ^ a b c d e Goldsmid 1911, p. 994. ^ a b Manz, Beatrice Forbes (2002). "Tamerlane's Career and Its Uses". Journal of World History. 13: 3. doi:10.1353/jwh.2002.0017. S2CID 143436772. ^ Denise Aigle The Mongol Empire between Myth and Reality: Studies in Anthropological History BRILL, 28 October 2014 p. 132 ^ Nicholas V. Raisanovsky; Mark D. Steinberg: A History of Russia Seventh Edition, pg 93 ^ "Commemoration of the Vladimir Icon of the Mother of God and the deliverance of Moscow from the Invasion of Tamerlane". oca.org. Retrieved 5 February 2019. ^ Wescoat, James L.; Wolschke-Bulmahn, Joachim (1996). Mughal Gardens. google.ca. ISBN 9780884022350. ^ Charles, p. 32. ^ Timur (18 April 2013). The Mulfuzat Timury, Or, Autobiographical Memoirs of the Moghul Emperor Timur: Written in the Jagtay Turky Language. Cambridge University Press. pp. vii–xxxvii. ISBN 978-1-108-05602-1. ^ Melville 2020, p. 56. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMelville2020 (help) ^ Manz 1999, p. 67-71. ^ Charles, p. 97-100. ^ a b Chaliand, Gerard; Arnaud Blin (2007). The History of Terrorism: From Antiquity to Al Qaeda. University of California Press. p. 87. ISBN 978-0-520-24709-3. isfahan Timur. ^ Fisher, W.B.; Jackson, P.; Lockhart, L.; Boyle, J.A. : The Cambridge History of Iran, p55. ^ Strange 1905, p. 267-287. ^ Manz 1999, p. 123-125. ^ Charles 2020, p. 109. sfn error: no target: CITEREFCharles2020 (help) ^ Shterenshis, Michael (2002). Tamerlane and the Jews. Psychology Press. pp. 144–189. ISBN 978-0-7007-1696-8. ^ Strange, Guy Le (1905). The Lands of the Eastern Caliphate: Mesopotamia, Persia, and Central Asia, from the Moslem Conquest to the Time of Timur. University Press. p. 235. ^ Morgan, David (19 September 2014). Medieval Persia 1040-1797. Routledge. pp. 167–184. ISBN 978-1-317-87140-8. ^ Nicholas V. Raisanovsky; Mark D. Steinberg: A History of Russia Seventh Edition, pg 94 ^ a b Virani, Shafique N. The Ismailis in the Middle Ages: A History of Survival, A Search for Salvation (New York: Oxford University Press), 2007, p. 116. ^ Hunter, Sir William Wilson (1909). "The Indian Empire: Timur's invasion 1398". The Imperial Gazetteer of India. 2. p. 366. ^ [1] The History of India, edited by Kenneth Pletcher Senior Editor, Geography and History pg.131 ^ Hooja, Rima (2006). A History of Rajasthan. Rupa and company. p. 371. ISBN 9788129108906. Bhatner was taken in 1391 by Timur from the Bhati Rajput King named Dulachand ^ a b History of India, as Told by Its Own Historians: The Muhammadan Period By Henry Miers Elliot pg.489-493 [2] ^ Ganga: The Many Pasts of a River ^ Singh, Raj Pal (1 January 1988). Rise of the Jat power. ISBN 9788185151052. Retrieved 22 May 2012. ^ Mallu, who later received the title of Iqbal Khan, was a noble in Siri and an ally of Muqarrab Khan, but later on betrayed him and Nusrat Khan, and allied with Nasir-ud-din Mahmud Shah. History Of Medieval India; V. D. Mahajan p.205 ^ "The Turco-Mongol Invasions". Rbedrosian.com. Retrieved 22 May 2012. ^ a b Nicol 1993, p. 314. ^ Masters, Bruce (1999). "Aleppo:the Ottoman Empire's caravan city". In Eldem, Edhem; Goffman, Daniel; Master, Bruce (eds.). The Ottoman City Between East and West: Aleppo, Izmir, and Istanbul. Cambridge University Press. p. 20. ^ Margaret Meserve, Empires of Islam in Renaissance Historical Thought, (Harvard University Press, 2008), 207. ^ Ibn Arabshah, Timur the Great Amir, p. 168 ^ Rhoads Murphey, Exploring Ottoman Sovereignty: Tradition, Image and Practice in the Ottoman Imperial Household 1400-1800; published by Continium, 2008; page-58 ^ Kevin Reilly (2012). The Human Journey: A Concise Introduction to World History. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 164–. ISBN 978-1-4422-1384-5. ^ Henry Cabot Lodge (1913). The History of Nations. P.F.Collier. pp. 51–. ^ Marina Belozerskaya (4 September 2012). Medusas Gaze: The Extraordinary Journey of the Tazza Farnese. Oxford University Press. pp. 88–. ISBN 978-0-19-987642-6. ^ Vertot (abbé de) (1856). The History of the Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem: Styled Afterwards, the Knights of Rhodes, and at Present, the Knights of Malta. J.W. Leonard & Company. pp. 104–. ^ a b Dimitris J. Kastritsis (2007). The Sons of Bayezid: Empire Building and Representation in the Ottoman Civil War of 1402-1413. Brill. p. 49. ^ Nuri Pere (1968). Osmanl?larda madenî paralar: Yap? ve Kredi Bankas?n?n Osmanl? madenî paralar? kolleksiyonu. Yap? ve Kredi Bankas?. p. 64. ^ Stevens, John. The history of Persia. Containing, the lives and memorable actions of its kings from the first erecting of that monarchy to this time; an exact Description of all its Dominions; a curious Account of India, China, Tartary, Kermon, Arabia, Nixabur, and the Islands of Ceylon and Timor; as also of all Cities occasionally mention'd, as Schiras, Samarkand, Bokara, &c. Manners and Customs of those People, Persian Worshippers of Fire; Plants, Beasts, Product, and Trade. With many instructive and pleasant digressions, being remarkable Stories or Passages, occasionally occurring, as Strange Burials; Burning of the Dead; Liquors of several Countries; Hunting; Fishing; Practice of Physick; famous Physicians in the East; Actions of Tamerlan, &c. To which is added, an abridgment of the lives of the kings of Harmuz, or Ormuz. The Persian history written in Arabick, by Mirkond, a famous Eastern Author that of Ormuz, by Torunxa, King of that Island, both of them translated into Spanish, by Antony Teixeira, who liv'd several Years in Persia and India; and now render'd into English. ^ Turnbull, Stephen (30 January 2007). The Great Wall of China 221 BC-1644 AD. Osprey Publishing. p. 23. ISBN 978-1-84603-004-8. Retrieved 26 March 2010. ^ a b c Tsai 2002, pp. 188–189. ^ C. P. Atwood-Encyclopedia of Mongolia and the Mongol Empire, see: Northern Yuan Dynasty ^ Adela C.Y. Lee. "Tamerlane (1336–1405) – The Last Great Nomad Power". Silkroad Foundation. Retrieved 22 May 2012. ^ Tsai 2002, p. 161. ^ James Louis Garvin, Franklin Henry Hooper, Warren E. Cox, The Encyclopedia Britannica, Volume 22 (1929), p. 233 ^ Abdulla Vakhabov, Muslims in the USSR (1980), p. 63-4 ^ Roya Marefat, Beyond the Architecture of Death: Shrine of the Shah-i Zinda in Samarqand (1991), p. 238 ^ a b Vasilii Vladimirovitch Barthold, Four Studies on the History of Central Asia, Vol. 2 (1959) ^ Marthe Bernus-Taylor, Tombs of Paradise: The Shah-e Zende in Samarkand and Architectural Ceramics of Central Asia (2003), p. 27 ^ Beatrice Forbes Manz, Power, Politics and Religion in Timurid Iran (2007), p. 16 ^ William Bayne Fisher, Peter Jackson, Peter Avery, Lawrence Lockhart, John Andrew Boyle, Ilya Gershevitch, Richard Nelson Frye, Charles Melville, Gavin Hambly, The Cambridge History of Iran, Volume VI (1986), p. 99-101 ^ Ph. D., History; J. D., University of Washington School of Law; B. A., History. "Biography of Tamerlane, 14th Century Conqueror of Asia". ThoughtCo. Retrieved 20 February 2020. ^ Woods (1991, pp. 17–19) ^ Vasilii Vladimirovitch Barthold, Four Studies on the History of Central Asia, Vol. 2 (1963), p. 31 ^ Manz 1999, p. 17. ^ "The Descendants of Sayyid Ata and the Rank of Naq?b in Central Asia" by Devin DeWeese Journal of the American Oriental Society, Vol. 115, No. 4 (Oct. – Dec. 1995), pp. 612–634 ^ Four studies on the history of Central Asia, Volume 1 By Vasilij Vladimirovi? Bartold p.19 ^ Islamic art By Barbara Brend p.130 ^ Michael Shterenshis Tamerlane and the Jews Routledge ISBN 9781136873669 p. 38 ^ a b Virani, Shafique N. The Ismailis in the Middle Ages: A History of Survival, A Search for Salvation (New York: Oxford University Press), 2007, p. 114. ^ Manz 1999, p. 16. ^ a b Walter Joseph Fischel, Ibn Khald?n in Egypt: His Public Functions and His Historical Research, 1382–1406; a Study in Islamic Historiography, University of California Press, 1967, page 51, footnote ^ Saunders, J. J. (March 2001). The History of the Mongol Conquests. University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 173–. ISBN 978-0-8122-1766-7. ^ Holden, Edward S. (2004) [1895]. The Mogul Emperors of Hindustan (1398–1707 A.D). New Delhi, India: Westminster, Archibald Constable and Co. pp. 47–48. ISBN 978-81-206-1883-1. ^ Cowell, Professor (first name not given). MacMillan's Magazine, vol. XXX (via Google Books). London: MacMillan & Co., 1874, p. 252. ^ Barthold, V.V. (1962). Four studies on the History of Central Asia, vol. 1 (Second Printing, 1962 ed.). Leiden, E.J.Brill. pp. 59–60. ^ Cazaux, Jean-Louis and Knowlton, Rick (2017). A World of Chess, p.31. McFarland. ISBN 9780786494279. "Often known as Tamerlane chess, [its invention] is traditionally attributed to the conqueror himself." ^ Document preserved at Le Musée de l'Histoire de France, code AE III 204. Mentioned Dossier II, 7, J936 ^ Mentioned Dossier II, 7 bis ^ Mentioned Dossier II, 7 ter ^ Frances Carney Gies (September–October 1978). "The Man Who Met Tamerlane". Saudi Aramco World. 29 (5). Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2011. ^ Manz 1999, p. 109"In Temür's government, as in those of most nomad dynasties, it is impossible to find a clear distinction between civil and military affairs, or to identify the Persian bureaucracy as solely civil or the Turko-Mongolian solely with military government. In fact, it is difficult to define the sphere of either side of the administration and we find Persians and Chaghatays sharing many tasks. (In discussing the settled bureaucracy and the people who worked within it I use the word Persian in a cultural rather than ethnological sense. In almost all the territories which Temür incorporated into his realm Persian was the primary language of administration and literary culture. Thus the language of the settled 'diwan' was Persian and its scribes had to be thoroughly adept in Persian culture, whatever their ethnic origin.) Temür's Chaghatay emirs were often involved in civil and provincial administration and even in financial affairs, traditionally the province of Persian bureaucracy." ^ Roy, Olivier (2007). The new Central Asia. I. B. Tauris. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-84511-552-4. ^ "History of the Nestorians". ^ "Iqbal'S Hindu Relations". The Telegraph. Calcutta, India. 30 June 2007. ^ a b Hameed ud-Din (2011). "Ab? ??leb ?osayn?". Encyclopædia Iranica. Retrieved 17 September 2014. ^ Milwright, Marcus (2006). "So Despicable a Vessel: Representations of Tamerlane in Printed Books of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries". Muqarnas. 23: 317. doi:10.1163/22118993-90000105. ^ a b c Knobler, Adam (November 1995). "The Rise of Timur and Western Diplomatic Response, 1390–1405". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. Third Series. 5 (3): 341–349. doi:10.1017/s135618630000660x. ^ ad-D?n?Al? Yazd?, Sharaf (1723). The History of Timur-Bec. 1. pp. xii–ix. Punctuation and spelling modernized. ^ Lev Vasil'evich Oshanin (1964). Anthropological composition of the population of Central Asia: and the ethnogenesis of its peoples. 2. Peabody Museum. p. 39. ^ Berna Özcan, Gül (2018). Diverging Paths of Development in Central Asia. Routledge. ISBN 978-1351739429. ^ Yah, Lim Chong (2001). Southeast Asia: The Long Road Ahead. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Company. p. 3. ISBN 978-981-310-584-3. ^ Russian Translation Series of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology. Harvard University. 1964. ^ Mikhail Mikhailovich Gerasimov (1971). The face finder. Hutchinson. p. 135. ISBN 978-0-09-105510-3. ^ Congress, United States. Congressional Record: Proceedings and Debates of the United States Congress. U.S. Government Printing Office. p. A7238. ^ Blanc, Pauline (2 October 2009). Selfhood on the Early Modern English Stage. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 72. ISBN 9781443815628. ^ "Uzbekistan: On the bloody trail of Tamerlane". The Independent. London. 9 July 2006. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Retrieved 17 April 2016.CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) ^ "Facial Reconstruction, Nazis, and Siberia: The story of Mikhail Gerasimov". 25 January 2011. Retrieved 9 November 2020. ^ Mark & Ruth Dickens. "Timurid Architecture in Samarkand". Oxuscom.com. Retrieved 22 May 2012. ^ Marozzi 2004 ^ "Näsimi (1973)". IMDb. Retrieved 31 August 2020. ^ Enrique Serrano (2 January 2011). Tamerlan (Biblioteca Breve) (Spanish ed.). ISBN 9789584205407. ^ "Day Watch—Full Cast & Crew". IMDb. Retrieved 31 August 2020. ^ "John Fletcher Radio Plays & Dramatisations". suttonelms.org. Retrieved 31 August 2020. ^ "Age of Empires 2: Definitive Edition review". PC Gamer. 12 November 2019. References Knobler, Adam (1995). "The Rise of T?m?r and Western Diplomatic Response, 1390–1405". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. Third Series. 5 (3): 341–349. doi:10.1017/S135618630000660X. Knobler, Adam (2001). "Timur the (Terrible/Tartar) Trope: a Case of Repositioning in Popular Literature and History". Medieval Encounters. 7 (1): 101–112. doi:10.1163/157006701X00102. Manz, Beatrice Forbes (1999). The Rise and Rule of Tamerlane. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521633840. May, Timothy. "Timur ("the Lame")(1336–1405)". The Encyclopedia of War. Nicol, Donald M. (1993). The Last Centuries of Byzantium, 1261-1453. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521439916. Melville, Charles (2020). The Timurid Century: The Idea of Iran Vol.9. University of Cambridge, English: Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 9781838606152. Tsai, Shih-Shan Henry (2002). Perpetual Happiness: the Ming Emperor Yongle. Seattle: University of Washington Press. ISBN 9780295981246. OCLC 870409962.  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Goldsmid, Frederic John (1911). "Tim?r". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 994–995. Further reading Abazov, Rafis. "Timur (Tamerlane) and the Timurid Empire in Central Asia." The Palgrave Concise Historical Atlas of Central Asia. Palgrave Macmillan US, 2008. 56–57. Lamb, Harold (1929). Tamerlane: The Earth Shaker (Hardback). London: Thorndon Butterworth. Marlowe, Christopher. Tamburlaine the Great. Ed. J. S. Cunningham. Manchester University Press, Manchester 1981. Manz, Beatrice Forbes. "Temür and the Problem of a Conqueror's Legacy," Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Third Series, Vol. 8, No. 1 (Apr. 1998) Marozzi, Justin. Tamerlane: sword of Islam, conqueror of the world, London: HarperCollins, 2004 Marozzi, Justin. "Tamerlane", in: The Art of War: great commanders of the ancient and medieval world, Andrew Roberts (editor), London: Quercus Military History, 2008. ISBN 978-1-84724-259-4 Novosel'tsev, A. P. "On the Historical Evaluation of Tamerlane." Soviet studies in history 12.3 (1973): 37–70. Shterenshis, Michael V. "Approach to Tamerlane: Tradition and Innovation." Central Asia and the Caucasus 2 (2000). Sykes, P. M. "Tamerlane" Journal of the Central Asian Society 2.1 (1915): 17–33. YÜKSEL, Musa ?amil. "Timur’un Yükseli?i ve Bat?’n?n Diplomatik Cevab?, 1390–1405." Selçuk Üniversitesi Türkiyat Ara?t?rmalar? Dergisi 1.18 (2005): 231–243. External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Timur. Forbes, Andrew, & Henley, David: Timur's Legacy: The Architecture of Bukhara and Samarkand (CPA Media) Narrative of the Embassy of Ruy Gonzalez De Clavijo to the Court of Timour, at Samarcand, A.D.1403-6 – Full text at Google Books. Ruy González de Clavijo, Embassy to Tamerlane, 1403–1406, translated by Guy Le Strange, with a new Introduction by Caroline Stone (Hardinge Simpole, 2009). Nationality or Religion: Views of Central Asian Islam Timur Timurid dynasty Preceded by None Timurid Empire 1370–1405 Succeeded by Pir Muhammad ibn Jahangir and Khalil Sultan v t e Timurid Empire Emperors Timur Pir Muhammad ibn Jahangir Khalil Sultan Shah Rukh Ulugh Beg Abdal-Latif Mirza Abdallah Mirza Sultan Muhammad bin Baysonqor Abul-Qasim Babur Mirza Abu Sa'id Mirza Sultan Ahmed Mirza Sultan Mahmud Mirza Mirza Shah Mahmud Ibrahim Mirza bin Ala-ud-Daulah Sultan Husayn Mirza Bayqara Yadgar Muhammad Mirza Badi' al-Zaman Mirza Battles and conflicts Siege of Balkh (1370) Tokhtamysh–Timur war Battle of the Kondurcha River (1391) Battle of the Terek River(1395) Invasions of Georgia (1386-1403) Battle of Qara-Derrah Pass (1395) Battle of Algami Canal (1402) Battle of Ankara (1402) Battle of Nakhchivan (1406) Siege of Shahrukhiya (1461) Battle of Qarabagh(1469) Battle of the Chirciq River (1488) Siege of Samarkand (1497) Battle of Sar-e-Pul (1501) Siege of Samarkand (1501) Siege of Kabul (1504) Battle of Ab Darrah Pass (1511) Battle of Ghazdewan (1512) Battle of Qalat-i-Ghilzai (1505) Battle of Bajaur (1519) Timurid wars of succession Siege of Balkh (1447) Battle of Damghan (1447) Battle of Nishapur (1447) Battle of Tarnab (1448) Occupation of Balkh (1447) Siege of Herat (1448) Revolt of Abdal-Latif Mirza (1449) Siege of Balkh (1447) Siege of Herat (1448) Battle of Farhadgerd (1449) Urdu Bazar Revolt (1447) Battle of Sarakhs (1459) Siege of Samarkand (1494) Battle of Akhsi (1502-03) Architecture Mausoleum of Khoja Ahmed Yasawi Bibi-Khanym Mosque Registan of Samarkand Gur-e-Amir Shakhrisabz Dorut Tilavat Ulugh Beg Madrasa Ulugh Beg Observatory Shah-i-Zinda Herat Musalla Complex Minarets Great Mosque of Herat Goharshad Mosque Blue Mosque of Mazar-i-Sharif Green Mosque Khanqah of Baha ad-Din Naqshbandi See also Persianate Turco-Mongol tradition Turco-Persian tradition Indo-Persian tradition Timurid dynasty family tree Timurid art Timurid Renaissance Timurid relations with Europe Mughal Empire v t e Ottoman Interregnum Background Rise of the Ottoman Empire Murad I Bayezid I Siege of Constantinople (1394–1402) Crusade of Nicopolis Timur Battle of Ankara Events Siege of Smyrna Battle of Tripolje Treaty of Gallipoli Battle of Ermeni-beli Battle of Ulubad Battle of Karasi Battle of Kosmidion Battle of Edirne Siege of Constantinople (1411) Treaty of Selymbria Battle of ?nce?iz Battle of Çamurlu Ottoman princes and leaders Mehmed I Süleyman Çelebi ?sa Çelebi Musa Çelebi Mustafa Çelebi Çandarl?zade Ali Pasha Imamzade Halil Pasha Bayezid Pasha Evrenos Pasha Yi?it Bey Mihalo?lu Mehmed Bey Turahan Bey Sheikh Bedreddin Neighbouring rulers and leaders Junayd Bey (Ayd?n) Manuel II Palaiologos (Byzantine Empire) John VII Palaiologos (Byzantine Empire) Demetrios Laskaris Leontares (Byzantine Empire) Nasireddin Mehmed Bey (Dulkadir) Yakup II (Germiyan) Philibert de Naillac (Hospitallers) Íñigo de Alfaro (Hospitallers) ?sfendiyar Bey Mehmed II (Karaman) Stefan Lazarevi? (Serbia) ?ura? Brankovi? (Serbia) Vuk Lazarevi? (Serbia) Mircea I (Wallachia) Authority control General Integrated Authority File (Germany) ISNI 1 VIAF 1 WorldCat National libraries Chile Spain France (data) Catalonia United States Latvia Japan Czech Republic Australia Greece Israel Korea Netherlands Poland Sweden Vatican Scientific databases CiNii (Japan) Other Faceted Application of Subject Terminology RERO (Switzerland) 1 Social Networks and Archival Context SUDOC (France) 1 Encyclopedia of Islam Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timur&oldid=1056362493" Categories: Timur Timurid dynasty 1336 births 1405 deaths Muslim monarchs Samarkand Royalty and nobility with disabilities Founding monarchs Hidden categories: Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Chagatay-language text CS1 maint: uses authors parameter Harv and Sfn no-target errors CS1 maint: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from November 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Articles containing Turkish-language text Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNC identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with CANTIC identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NLI identifiers Articles with NLK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with SELIBR identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with CINII identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with RERO identifiers Articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Articles with TDV?A identifiers Articles with WORLDCATID identifiers AC with 26 elements Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Languages Afrikaans Alemannisch ???? ??????? Aragonés ?????????????? Asturianu Az?rbaycanca ?????? ????? Bân-lâm-gú ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg ?????? Català ??????? ?eština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ??????? ??? ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ???? Íslenska Italiano ????? Kab?y? ????? ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî ???????? Latina Latviešu ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Magyar ?????? ?????????? Malagasy ?????? ????? ????????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ????? ???? ??? ??????? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan O?zbekcha/??????? ?????? ?????? ???? Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Q?r?mtatarca Român? ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? ????????? Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça ?????? ??? ?????? Türkçe ?????????? ???? ???????? / Uyghurche Ti?ng Vi?t Võro ?? Winaray ?? ?????? ?? Zazaki Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 21 November 2021, at 09:40 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement