https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transgender_Day_of_Remembrance Transgender Day of Remembrance - Wikipedia Transgender Day of Remembrance From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Day to memorialize those who have been killed as a result of transphobia Transgender Day of Remembrance A Transgender Pride flag on the British Foreign Office, 2018 Observed by Transgender community and supporters Type International Cultural Celebrations Typically, a TDoR memorial includes a reading of the names of those who lost their lives from November 20 of the former year to November 20 of the current year, and may include other actions, such as candlelight vigils, dedicated church services, marches, art shows, food drives and film screenings Date November 20 Frequency Annual First time 1999; 22 years ago (1999) Related to Transgender Awareness Week, International Transgender Day of Visibility Part of a series on Transgender topics       Gender identities Androgyne Cisgender Gender bender Non-binary (or genderqueer) Third gender Akava'ine Bakla Bissu Calabai Fa?afafine Fakaleit? Femminiello Hijra Kathoey Khanith Koekchuch M?h? Mak nyah Mukhannathun Muxe Albanian sworn virgins Takat?pui Travesti Two-spirit Winkte Trans man Trans woman Transsexual History Outline Timeline United Kingdom United States Compton's Cafeteria riot Stonewall riots Intersex Health care and medicine Detransition Gender dysphoria In children Health care Hormone therapy Pregnancy Sex reassignment Surgery Therapy To female To male Voice therapy Rights and legal issues Discrimination Anti-gender movement Inequality Non-binary Transmisandry Transmisogyny Transphobia Legal status Rights movement Non-binary, third gender Organizations Military service Toilets Bathroom bills Unisex Violence Trans bashing Unlawful killings Trans panic Yogyakarta Principles Society and culture LGBT-related films Events Awareness Week Day of Remembrance Day of Visibility March LGBT Flags History Media portrayals Fictional characters Film Television People Non-binary Publications Religion Sports Transitioning Youth more Theory and concepts Ambiphilia, androphilia, gynephilia Childhood gender nonconformity Cisgender / cissexual Cross-dressing Gender binary Gender expression Gender identity Gender-sexuality questioning Gender variance Postgenderism Transfeminism Transmedicalism Transmisogyny By country Argentina Australia Rights Re Kevin Brazil Canada Bill C-16, 2016 Rights China Germany India Rights of Transgender Persons Bill, 2014 Tamil Nadu Iran Ireland New Zealand Singapore South Africa Turkey United Kingdom Rights Gender Recognition Act 2004 History United States Cafeteria riot Disenfranchisement History Legal history Rights Title IX See also Gender Intersex Queer heterosexuality LGBT Sex sex assignment Sex and gender distinction Sexual orientation  LGBT portal  Transgender portal v t e The Transgender Day of Remembrance (TDoR), also known as the International Transgender Day of Remembrance, has been observed annually (from its inception) on November 20 as a day to memorialize those who have been murdered as a result of transphobia.[1][2] The day was founded to draw attention to the continued violence endured by transgender people.[3] Transgender Day of Remembrance was founded in 1999 by a small group, including Gwendolyn Ann Smith,[4] to memorialize the murder of transgender woman Rita Hester in Allston, Massachusetts.[5] In 2010, TDoR was observed in over 185 cities throughout more than 20 countries.[6] Typically, a TDoR memorial includes a reading of the names of those who lost their lives from November 20 of the former year to November 20 of the current year,[7] and may include other actions, such as candlelight vigils, dedicated church services, marches, art shows, food drives and film screenings.[8] GLAAD (formerly the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation) has extensively covered TDoR, interviewed numerous transgender advocates (including actress Candis Cayne),[9] profiled an event at the New York City LGBT Community Center and discussed media coverage of TDoR. Contents 1 History 2 Race, TDoR, and Transgender Women of Color 3 Recognition by governments 4 See also 5 References 6 External links History[edit] Rita Hester (November 30, 1963 – November 28, 1998) was a transgender African-American woman who was murdered in Allston, Massachusetts, on November 28, 1998.[10] In response to her murder, an outpouring of grief and anger led to a candlelight vigil held the following Friday (December 4) in which about 250 people participated. The community struggle to see Rita's life and identity covered respectfully by local papers, including the Boston Herald and Bay Windows, was chronicled by Nancy Nangeroni.[11] Her death inspired the "Remembering Our Dead" web project and the Transgender Day of Remembrance (TDoR).[12] Race, TDoR, and Transgender Women of Color[edit] CeCe McDonald speaks at the 2015 Transgender Day of Remembrance in San Francisco. While TDoR is a critical event, scholars and activists committed to advancing intersectional approaches to trans politics continue to highlight the importance of seeing transphobic violence as inherently connected to race, gender, and class. This is reflected in the disproportionate instances of violence against trans women of color in general, Black and Latina transgender women in particular.[13][14][15] Play media The transgender pride flag being raised above the California State Capitol on the Transgender Day of Remembrance in 2019. Theorists C. Riley Snorton and Jin Haritaworn critique how images and narratives centering on the deaths of trans people of color—most often transfeminine bodies of color—are circulated within social movements and spaces headed by white gay and trans activists, such as TDoR.[16] Reflecting on the case of African American trans woman Tyra Hunter, Snorton and Haritaworn observe the dangers of positioning trans women and transfeminine bodies of color as legible only in the aftermath of their deaths, and failing to see such violence as effects of both systematic transphobia and racism. Resonating alongside (but not limited to) trans activists CeCe McDonald, Reina Gossett, Sylvia Rivera, and Dean Spade, Snorton and Haritaworn's work advocates for the importance of an intersectional approach to events such as TDoR and transgender activism in general.[citation needed] Scholar Sarah Lamble (2008) argues that TDoR's focus on a collective mourning risks producing the white spectator as innocent of, rather than complicit in, the violence that produces the deaths of trans women of color they are mourning. Lamble states that:[17] Our task then is to push these further—not only with respect to TDOR but also in the many ways we recount and confront violence. None of us are innocent. We must envision practices of remembrance that situate our own positions within structures of power that authorize violence in the first place. Our task is to move from sympathy to responsibility, from complicity to reflexivity, from witnessing to action. It is not enough to simply honor the memory of the dead—we must transform the practices of the living. Transgender activist Mirha-Soleil Ross criticizes TDoR for conflating the motivation behind the murders of transgender women sex workers. In an interview with scholar Viviane Namaste, she presents examples of transgender sex workers who were murdered in Toronto for being sex workers and accuses the organizers of TDoR of using these women who died for being sex workers as martyrs of the transgender community.[18] Recognition by governments[edit] The Canadian province of Ontario unanimously passed the Trans Day of Remembrance Act, 2017 on December 12, 2017, officially recognizing TDoR and requiring the Legislative Assembly of Ontario to hold a moment of silence every year on November 20.[19][20] In 2020, US president-elect Joe Biden recognized the Transgender Day of Remembrance and said the transphobic violence experienced by trans women is intolerable.[21] See also[edit] Transgender portal Hate crime History of transgender people in the United States International Transgender Day of Visibility List of transgender-rights organizations List of people killed for being transgender Trans bashing Trans Day of Action Transgender rights movement References[edit] ^ "Trans Day of Remembrance". Massachusetts Transgender Political Coalition. 2013. Archived from the original on August 14, 2010. Retrieved November 20, 2013. ^ "Transgender Day of Remembrance". Human Rights Campaign. Archived from the original on November 26, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013. ^ Millen, Lainey (November 20, 2008). "North Carolinians mark Transgender Remembrance Day". QNotes. Archived from the original on July 24, 2011. Retrieved November 28, 2010. ^ Smith, Gwendolyn Ann (November 20, 2012). "Transgender Day of Remembrance: Why We Remember". HuffPost. Retrieved May 3, 2021. In 1999 a handful of transgender people sought to highlight the need for awareness around anti-transgender violence, which refers to attacks against people who are perceived as transgender — regardless of how one may personally identify. To that end, we held the first Transgender Day of Remembrance event in the Castro district of San Francisco, holding the names of those we’d lost in silent testimony. ^ Jacobs, Ethan (November 15, 2008). "Remembering Rita Hester". EDGE Boston. Archived from the original on October 8, 2012. Retrieved November 28, 2010. ^ St. Pierre, E. (2010). TDoR Events and Locations 2010. Transgenderdor.org. ^ * "St. Louis Observes Transgender Day of Remembrance". Vital Voice. 2012. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. "Transgender deaths commemorated at Brighton vigil". BBC News. November 21, 2010. Archived from the original on November 20, 2018. Retrieved June 21, 2018. ^ Gonzalez, Yvonne (November 18, 2010). "Groups recognize transgender remembrance day". The State Press. Archived from the original on November 22, 2010. ^ "Exclusive Video: Candis Cayne Discusses Being Out as Transgender in Hollywood". GLAAD. November 20, 2009. Archived from the original on August 4, 2011. Retrieved March 7, 2011. ^ 'Remembering Rita Hester' Archived November 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine November 15, 2008, Edge Boston ^ Nancy Nangeroni (February 1, 1999). "Rita Hester's Murder and the Language of Respect". Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved November 20, 2017. ^ Irene Monroe (November 19, 2010). "Remembering Trans Heroine Rita Hester". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on November 16, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. ^ National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs. "Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and HIV-Affected Hate Violence in 2014" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on July 5, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2016. ^ "Black Trans* Women's Lives Matter". Archived from the original on January 14, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2016. ^ Vincent, Addison Rose (August 13, 2015). "State of Emergency Continues for Trans Women of Color". Archived from the original on March 24, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2016 – via Huffington Post. ^ C. Riley Snorton and Jin Haritaworn (2013). Trans necropolitics: A transnational reflection on violence, death, and the trans of color afterlife. The Transgender Studies Reader 2: New York: Routledge Press. pp. 66–76. Archived from the original on February 27, 2019. Retrieved February 10, 2018.CS1 maint: location (link) ^ Lamble, Sarah (2008). "Retelling racialized violence, remaking white innocence: The politics of interlocking oppressions in Transgender Day of Remembrance". Sexuality Research and Social Policy. 5: 24–42. doi:10.1525/srsp.2008.5.1.24. S2CID 7786376. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved March 19, 2016. ^ Namaste, Viviane (2011). Sex Change, Social Change. Women's Press. ISBN 9780889614833. ^ "Ontario enshrines Trans Day of Remembrance in law as Nov. 20". CP24. The Canadian Press. December 12, 2017. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. ^ "Trans Day of Remembrance Act, 2017". S.O. 2017, c. 29, Act of December 14, 2017. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. ^ https://www.instagram.com/p/CH0XLNahl-o/ External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Transgender Day of Remembrance. Smith, Gwendolyn Ann. "Transgender Day of Remembrance: Rita Hester and Beyond", Huffington Post, 2013-11-20. International Transgender Day of Remembrance at GLAAD Transgender Day Of Remembrance – Manchester, UK v t e Transgender topics Gender identities Androgyne Gender bender Non-binary (or genderqueer) Third gender Akava'ine Bakla Bissu Calabai Fa'afafine Fakaleit? Femminiello Hijra Kathoey Khanith Koekchuch M?h? Maknyah Mukhannathun Muxe Sworn virgin Takat?pui Travesti Two-spirit Winkte Trans man Trans woman Transsexual Health care and medicine Gender dysphoria In children Health care Pregnancy Sex reassignment therapy surgery to female to male Rights Discrimination Anti-gender movement Cissexism Inequality Discrimination against non-binary gender people Transphobia Transmisogyny Rights Legal recognition of non-binary gender movement marriage organizations Toilets Bathroom bills Unisex Violence Trans bashing Unlawful killings Trans panic Yogyakarta Principles Society and culture Christianity LGBT-related films Events Awareness Week Day of Remembrance Day of Visibility March Non-binary People's Day LGBT Flags History Media portrayals Fictional characters Film and television People Pornography Publications Sexuality Sports Youth more Theory and concepts Ambiphilia / Androphilia / Gynephilia Causes of transsexuality Cisgender / cissexual Cross-dressing Gender binary Gender expression Gender identity Gender/sexuality questioning Gender variance Postgenderism Transfeminism Transmedicalism Transmisogyny Transvestism By country Argentina Australia Rights Re Kevin Brazil Canada Bill C-16, 2016 Rights China Germany India Rights of Transgender Persons Bill, 2014 Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 Kerala Tamil Nadu Iran Ireland New Zealand Singapore South Africa South Korea Turkey Pakistan Transgender Persons Bill, 2017 United Kingdom Rights Gender Recognition Act 2004 United States Cafeteria riot Disenfranchisement History Legal history Rights Title IX See also Detransition Gender Intersex LGBT Sex Sex assignment Sex and gender distinction Sexual orientation Outline Timeline  Transgender portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transgender_Day_of_Remembrance&oldid=1056263640" Categories: Transphobia Discrimination against transgender people Violence against LGBT people Civil awareness days Transgender events November observances Recurring events established in 1999 International observances LGBT-related observances Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2018 Infobox holiday with missing field Infobox holiday fixed day All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Commons category link from Wikidata AC with 0 elements Articles containing video clips Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Anarâškielâ Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français ??? ??????? Interlingua Italiano ????? Latina Nederlands ?????? ??? Norsk bokmål Polski Português ??????? Sardu Simple English Slovenš?ina ????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe ?????????? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 20 November 2021, at 19:12 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transgender_Day_of_Remembrance Transgender Day of Remembrance - Wikipedia Transgender Day of Remembrance From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Day to memorialize those who have been killed as a result of transphobia Transgender Day of Remembrance A Transgender Pride flag on the British Foreign Office, 2018 Observed by Transgender community and supporters Type International Cultural Celebrations Typically, a TDoR memorial includes a reading of the names of those who lost their lives from November 20 of the former year to November 20 of the current year, and may include other actions, such as candlelight vigils, dedicated church services, marches, art shows, food drives and film screenings Date November 20 Frequency Annual First time 1999; 22 years ago (1999) Related to Transgender Awareness Week, International Transgender Day of Visibility Part of a series on Transgender topics       Gender identities Androgyne Cisgender Gender bender Non-binary (or genderqueer) Third gender Akava'ine Bakla Bissu Calabai Fa?afafine Fakaleit? Femminiello Hijra Kathoey Khanith Koekchuch M?h? Mak nyah Mukhannathun Muxe Albanian sworn virgins Takat?pui Travesti Two-spirit Winkte Trans man Trans woman Transsexual History Outline Timeline United Kingdom United States Compton's Cafeteria riot Stonewall riots Intersex Health care and medicine Detransition Gender dysphoria In children Health care Hormone therapy Pregnancy Sex reassignment Surgery Therapy To female To male Voice therapy Rights and legal issues Discrimination Anti-gender movement Inequality Non-binary Transmisandry Transmisogyny Transphobia Legal status Rights movement Non-binary, third gender Organizations Military service Toilets Bathroom bills Unisex Violence Trans bashing Unlawful killings Trans panic Yogyakarta Principles Society and culture LGBT-related films Events Awareness Week Day of Remembrance Day of Visibility March LGBT Flags History Media portrayals Fictional characters Film Television People Non-binary Publications Religion Sports Transitioning Youth more Theory and concepts Ambiphilia, androphilia, gynephilia Childhood gender nonconformity Cisgender / cissexual Cross-dressing Gender binary Gender expression Gender identity Gender-sexuality questioning Gender variance Postgenderism Transfeminism Transmedicalism Transmisogyny By country Argentina Australia Rights Re Kevin Brazil Canada Bill C-16, 2016 Rights China Germany India Rights of Transgender Persons Bill, 2014 Tamil Nadu Iran Ireland New Zealand Singapore South Africa Turkey United Kingdom Rights Gender Recognition Act 2004 History United States Cafeteria riot Disenfranchisement History Legal history Rights Title IX See also Gender Intersex Queer heterosexuality LGBT Sex sex assignment Sex and gender distinction Sexual orientation  LGBT portal  Transgender portal v t e The Transgender Day of Remembrance (TDoR), also known as the International Transgender Day of Remembrance, has been observed annually (from its inception) on November 20 as a day to memorialize those who have been murdered as a result of transphobia.[1][2] The day was founded to draw attention to the continued violence endured by transgender people.[3] Transgender Day of Remembrance was founded in 1999 by a small group, including Gwendolyn Ann Smith,[4] to memorialize the murder of transgender woman Rita Hester in Allston, Massachusetts.[5] In 2010, TDoR was observed in over 185 cities throughout more than 20 countries.[6] Typically, a TDoR memorial includes a reading of the names of those who lost their lives from November 20 of the former year to November 20 of the current year,[7] and may include other actions, such as candlelight vigils, dedicated church services, marches, art shows, food drives and film screenings.[8] GLAAD (formerly the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation) has extensively covered TDoR, interviewed numerous transgender advocates (including actress Candis Cayne),[9] profiled an event at the New York City LGBT Community Center and discussed media coverage of TDoR. Contents 1 History 2 Race, TDoR, and Transgender Women of Color 3 Recognition by governments 4 See also 5 References 6 External links History[edit] Rita Hester (November 30, 1963 – November 28, 1998) was a transgender African-American woman who was murdered in Allston, Massachusetts, on November 28, 1998.[10] In response to her murder, an outpouring of grief and anger led to a candlelight vigil held the following Friday (December 4) in which about 250 people participated. The community struggle to see Rita's life and identity covered respectfully by local papers, including the Boston Herald and Bay Windows, was chronicled by Nancy Nangeroni.[11] Her death inspired the "Remembering Our Dead" web project and the Transgender Day of Remembrance (TDoR).[12] Race, TDoR, and Transgender Women of Color[edit] CeCe McDonald speaks at the 2015 Transgender Day of Remembrance in San Francisco. While TDoR is a critical event, scholars and activists committed to advancing intersectional approaches to trans politics continue to highlight the importance of seeing transphobic violence as inherently connected to race, gender, and class. This is reflected in the disproportionate instances of violence against trans women of color in general, Black and Latina transgender women in particular.[13][14][15] Play media The transgender pride flag being raised above the California State Capitol on the Transgender Day of Remembrance in 2019. Theorists C. Riley Snorton and Jin Haritaworn critique how images and narratives centering on the deaths of trans people of color—most often transfeminine bodies of color—are circulated within social movements and spaces headed by white gay and trans activists, such as TDoR.[16] Reflecting on the case of African American trans woman Tyra Hunter, Snorton and Haritaworn observe the dangers of positioning trans women and transfeminine bodies of color as legible only in the aftermath of their deaths, and failing to see such violence as effects of both systematic transphobia and racism. Resonating alongside (but not limited to) trans activists CeCe McDonald, Reina Gossett, Sylvia Rivera, and Dean Spade, Snorton and Haritaworn's work advocates for the importance of an intersectional approach to events such as TDoR and transgender activism in general.[citation needed] Scholar Sarah Lamble (2008) argues that TDoR's focus on a collective mourning risks producing the white spectator as innocent of, rather than complicit in, the violence that produces the deaths of trans women of color they are mourning. Lamble states that:[17] Our task then is to push these further—not only with respect to TDOR but also in the many ways we recount and confront violence. None of us are innocent. We must envision practices of remembrance that situate our own positions within structures of power that authorize violence in the first place. Our task is to move from sympathy to responsibility, from complicity to reflexivity, from witnessing to action. It is not enough to simply honor the memory of the dead—we must transform the practices of the living. Transgender activist Mirha-Soleil Ross criticizes TDoR for conflating the motivation behind the murders of transgender women sex workers. In an interview with scholar Viviane Namaste, she presents examples of transgender sex workers who were murdered in Toronto for being sex workers and accuses the organizers of TDoR of using these women who died for being sex workers as martyrs of the transgender community.[18] Recognition by governments[edit] The Canadian province of Ontario unanimously passed the Trans Day of Remembrance Act, 2017 on December 12, 2017, officially recognizing TDoR and requiring the Legislative Assembly of Ontario to hold a moment of silence every year on November 20.[19][20] In 2020, US president-elect Joe Biden recognized the Transgender Day of Remembrance and said the transphobic violence experienced by trans women is intolerable.[21] See also[edit] Transgender portal Hate crime History of transgender people in the United States International Transgender Day of Visibility List of transgender-rights organizations List of people killed for being transgender Trans bashing Trans Day of Action Transgender rights movement References[edit] ^ "Trans Day of Remembrance". Massachusetts Transgender Political Coalition. 2013. Archived from the original on August 14, 2010. Retrieved November 20, 2013. ^ "Transgender Day of Remembrance". Human Rights Campaign. Archived from the original on November 26, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013. ^ Millen, Lainey (November 20, 2008). "North Carolinians mark Transgender Remembrance Day". QNotes. Archived from the original on July 24, 2011. Retrieved November 28, 2010. ^ Smith, Gwendolyn Ann (November 20, 2012). "Transgender Day of Remembrance: Why We Remember". HuffPost. Retrieved May 3, 2021. In 1999 a handful of transgender people sought to highlight the need for awareness around anti-transgender violence, which refers to attacks against people who are perceived as transgender — regardless of how one may personally identify. To that end, we held the first Transgender Day of Remembrance event in the Castro district of San Francisco, holding the names of those we’d lost in silent testimony. ^ Jacobs, Ethan (November 15, 2008). "Remembering Rita Hester". EDGE Boston. Archived from the original on October 8, 2012. Retrieved November 28, 2010. ^ St. Pierre, E. (2010). TDoR Events and Locations 2010. Transgenderdor.org. ^ * "St. Louis Observes Transgender Day of Remembrance". Vital Voice. 2012. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. "Transgender deaths commemorated at Brighton vigil". BBC News. November 21, 2010. Archived from the original on November 20, 2018. Retrieved June 21, 2018. ^ Gonzalez, Yvonne (November 18, 2010). "Groups recognize transgender remembrance day". The State Press. Archived from the original on November 22, 2010. ^ "Exclusive Video: Candis Cayne Discusses Being Out as Transgender in Hollywood". GLAAD. November 20, 2009. Archived from the original on August 4, 2011. Retrieved March 7, 2011. ^ 'Remembering Rita Hester' Archived November 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine November 15, 2008, Edge Boston ^ Nancy Nangeroni (February 1, 1999). "Rita Hester's Murder and the Language of Respect". Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved November 20, 2017. ^ Irene Monroe (November 19, 2010). "Remembering Trans Heroine Rita Hester". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on November 16, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. ^ National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs. "Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and HIV-Affected Hate Violence in 2014" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on July 5, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2016. ^ "Black Trans* Women's Lives Matter". Archived from the original on January 14, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2016. ^ Vincent, Addison Rose (August 13, 2015). "State of Emergency Continues for Trans Women of Color". Archived from the original on March 24, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2016 – via Huffington Post. ^ C. Riley Snorton and Jin Haritaworn (2013). Trans necropolitics: A transnational reflection on violence, death, and the trans of color afterlife. The Transgender Studies Reader 2: New York: Routledge Press. pp. 66–76. Archived from the original on February 27, 2019. Retrieved February 10, 2018.CS1 maint: location (link) ^ Lamble, Sarah (2008). "Retelling racialized violence, remaking white innocence: The politics of interlocking oppressions in Transgender Day of Remembrance". Sexuality Research and Social Policy. 5: 24–42. doi:10.1525/srsp.2008.5.1.24. S2CID 7786376. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved March 19, 2016. ^ Namaste, Viviane (2011). Sex Change, Social Change. Women's Press. ISBN 9780889614833. ^ "Ontario enshrines Trans Day of Remembrance in law as Nov. 20". CP24. The Canadian Press. December 12, 2017. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. ^ "Trans Day of Remembrance Act, 2017". S.O. 2017, c. 29, Act of December 14, 2017. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. ^ https://www.instagram.com/p/CH0XLNahl-o/ External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Transgender Day of Remembrance. Smith, Gwendolyn Ann. "Transgender Day of Remembrance: Rita Hester and Beyond", Huffington Post, 2013-11-20. International Transgender Day of Remembrance at GLAAD Transgender Day Of Remembrance – Manchester, UK v t e Transgender topics Gender identities Androgyne Gender bender Non-binary (or genderqueer) Third gender Akava'ine Bakla Bissu Calabai Fa'afafine Fakaleit? Femminiello Hijra Kathoey Khanith Koekchuch M?h? Maknyah Mukhannathun Muxe Sworn virgin Takat?pui Travesti Two-spirit Winkte Trans man Trans woman Transsexual Health care and medicine Gender dysphoria In children Health care Pregnancy Sex reassignment therapy surgery to female to male Rights Discrimination Anti-gender movement Cissexism Inequality Discrimination against non-binary gender people Transphobia Transmisogyny Rights Legal recognition of non-binary gender movement marriage organizations Toilets Bathroom bills Unisex Violence Trans bashing Unlawful killings Trans panic Yogyakarta Principles Society and culture Christianity LGBT-related films Events Awareness Week Day of Remembrance Day of Visibility March Non-binary People's Day LGBT Flags History Media portrayals Fictional characters Film and television People Pornography Publications Sexuality Sports Youth more Theory and concepts Ambiphilia / Androphilia / Gynephilia Causes of transsexuality Cisgender / cissexual Cross-dressing Gender binary Gender expression Gender identity Gender/sexuality questioning Gender variance Postgenderism Transfeminism Transmedicalism Transmisogyny Transvestism By country Argentina Australia Rights Re Kevin Brazil Canada Bill C-16, 2016 Rights China Germany India Rights of Transgender Persons Bill, 2014 Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 Kerala Tamil Nadu Iran Ireland New Zealand Singapore South Africa South Korea Turkey Pakistan Transgender Persons Bill, 2017 United Kingdom Rights Gender Recognition Act 2004 United States Cafeteria riot Disenfranchisement History Legal history Rights Title IX See also Detransition Gender Intersex LGBT Sex Sex assignment Sex and gender distinction Sexual orientation Outline Timeline  Transgender portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transgender_Day_of_Remembrance&oldid=1056263640" Categories: Transphobia Discrimination against transgender people Violence against LGBT people Civil awareness days Transgender events November observances Recurring events established in 1999 International observances LGBT-related observances Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2018 Infobox holiday with missing field Infobox holiday fixed day All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Commons category link from Wikidata AC with 0 elements Articles containing video clips Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Anarâškielâ Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Français ??? ??????? Interlingua Italiano ????? Latina Nederlands ?????? ??? Norsk bokmål Polski Português ??????? Sardu Simple English Slovenš?ina ????? Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe ?????????? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 20 November 2021, at 19:12 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement