https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:Random Weequahic Park - Wikipedia Weequahic Park From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search United States historic place Weequahic Park Historic District U.S. National Register of Historic Places New Jersey Register of Historic Places Weequahic Lake Show map of Essex County, New Jersey Show map of New Jersey Show map of the United States Location Roughly bounded by Meeker Avenue, Dayton Street, Elizabeth Avenue, Union County border, Coordinates 40°42?07?N 74°12?11?W? / ?40.702°N 74.203°W? / 40.702; -74.203Coordinates: 40°42?07?N 74°12?11?W? / ?40.702°N 74.203°W? / 40.702; -74.203 NRHP reference No. 03000013[1] NJRHP No. 1342[1] Significant dates Added to NRHP February 12, 2003 Designated NJRHP December 12, 2002 Weequahic Park is a park located in the south ward of Newark, New Jersey, USA, designed by the Olmsted Brothers firm, (who also designed Branch Brook Park in Newark). Weequahic Park has the largest lake in Essex County. The park is 311.33 acres including an 80-acre lake.[2] The East Coast Greenway runs through the park.[3] West of Weequahic Park is Weequahic, a middle-class residential neighborhood. East of Weequahic Park is Dayton and Newark Airport. Contents 1 History 2 Divident Hill pavilion 3 References 4 External links History[edit] The park opened on what had been the Waverly Fairgrounds. The word "Weequahic" is from the Lenni-Lenape Native American term for "head of the cove". Tradition holds that the lake in the park (once a cove) stood as the boundary between the Raritan and Hackensack bands of Lenape Indians.[4] In 1923, the park hosted the first American Track & Field championships for women. Divident Hill pavilion[edit] A visual feature of Weequahic Park, along with the Weequahic Golf Course, is the miniature Roman-style stone temple serving as the park's gazebo and pavilion on Divident Hill.[5] It was placed to mark the local hill where, on May 20, 1668, Robert Treat and other commissioners of the town of Newark met with the commissioners of Elizabeth-town to fix the boundaries between the settlements.[6] "Divident Hill" is not a typographical error; rather, "divident" is simply an old-fashioned term for "divided". The hill is also called "Bound-Hill".[7] On that date and on that hill, the founders of Newark and Elizabeth entered "a religious covenant ... to protect their generation and 1,000 generations to come".[5] The gazebo was designed by the famed Beaux Arts design firm Carrère and Hastings for Newark's 250th anniversary in 1916. Advocates from The Weequahic Park Sports Authority, a non-profit conservancy group, along with the Newark Environmental Commission and local spiritual leaders, began advocating for the pavilion's restoration to its former glory in 2018.[5] References[edit] ^ a b "New Jersey and National Registers of Historic Places - Essex County". New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection - Historic Preservation Office. Retrieved June 12, 2019. ^ "Weequahic Park", Project for Public Spaces. ^ East Coast Greenway New Jersey Committee[dead link] ^ "Weequahic Park". County of Essex. Retrieved September 21, 2006. ^ a b c "Praying for a Newark treasure - Di Ionno". NJ.com. May 31, 2018. ^ Elisha Boudinot (1913). "Chapter XXV". A history of the city of Newark, New Jersey : embracing practically two and a half centuries, 1666-1913. New York, Chicago: The Lewis Historical Publishing Co. – via Internet Archive. ^ "Weequahic Park", Newarkology External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Weequahic Park. http://www.weequahicpark.com http://www.newarkhistory.com/weequahicpark.html Newark history: Weequahic Park County of Essex: Weequahic Park Video from East Coast Greenway about Weequahic Park v t e Essex County Park System Parks Anderson Park Becker Park Belleville Park Branch Brook Park Brookdale Park Glenfield Park Grover Cleveland Park Independence Park lrvington Park lvy Hill Park Kip's Castle Park Orange Park Riverbank Park RiverFront Park Vailsburg Park Verona Park Watsessing Park Weequahic Park West Side Park Yanticaw Park Reservations Eagle Rock Reservation Hilltop Reservation Mills Reservation South Mountain Reservation West Essex Park Other facilities Francis A. Byrne Golf Course Hendricks Field Golf Course Riker Hill Complex South Mountain Recreation Complex Weequahic Golf Course West Essex Trail This Essex County, New Jersey state location article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Weequahic_Park&oldid=1051423926" Categories: Geography of Newark, New Jersey Parks in Essex County, New Jersey Tourist attractions in Newark, New Jersey New Jersey geography stubs Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata All stub articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Article Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Cebuano Edit links This page was last edited on 23 October 2021, at 12:30 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement