https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Survivor: Fans vs. Survivors Jewish women in the Holocaust Battle of Rhone Crossing Probe tip Shahrekord University More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks SULFA Pskov State University World War I Memorials and Cemeteries in Alsace TechTV 2019 Rochford District Council election More... • Learn how Update with new information Kant? Soccer League Liberal Party of New York Ultra Bra Eesti talent Everyday Italian More... • Learn how Expand short articles Phaulernis dentella Epermenia isolexa Epermenia hamata Epermenia sinica Epermenia strictellus More... • Learn how Check and add references 2020 Delhi riots Ashtadiggajas Haltlose personality disorder Florian Krampe Cydia amplana More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Cleansing of the Temple Mojo in the Morning Cork Constitution JetDirect Francesco di Antonio del Chierico More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Hyangak Electron-longitudinal acoustic phonon interaction 1956 B-47 disappearance The One with Unagi Criminal law of Canada More... • Learn how Add an image Tikabali Tache Avenue, Winnipeg The Boundary (shopping centre) The Milky Way (amusement park) Transport in Mauritius More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Gustavo Bou Lake Svetloyar Avtokam Dorados de Sinaloa AG Neovo More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Geography of Iceland Previous selections: Air sports · Isabel Adrian · Postmodernism This week's backlog of the week is: Category:Articles to be merged Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Recent changes Most large file uploads errors that had messages like "stashfailed" or "DBQueryError" have now been fixed. An incident report is available. Problems Sometimes, edits made on iOS using the visual editor save groups of numbers as telephone number links, because of a feature in the operating system. This problem is under investigation. [1] There was a problem with search last week. Many search requests did not work for 2 hours because of a configuration error. [2] Changes later this week The new version of MediaWiki will be on test wikis and MediaWiki.org from 16 November. It will be on non-Wikipedia wikis and some Wikipedias from 17 November. It will be on all wikis from 18 November (calendar). Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages Questions period for Arbitration Committee elections RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Grey's Anatomy (season 17) UEFA Euro 2020 Final Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Municipalities of San Luis Potosí world number one snooker players Bong Joon-ho filmography 1951 in spaceflight Pictures Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Dewey Arch Peanuts Viviparus georgianus The Burning of the Houses of Lords and Commons Portrait of Adeline Ravoux The Large Plane Trees Chlamys varia, right valve Chlamys varia, left valve SHRIMP device in its shot cab Agha Bozorg Mosque Museu de les Ciències Príncipe Felipe Tip of the day Tip of the day... How to provide a Google search in a link Here is an example of a link which activates a Google search: Tip of the day, on Wikipedia It was built using this wikilink: [[google:"Tip of the day"+site:en.wikipedia.org|Tip of the day, on Wikipedia]] Sometimes it is useful to place a link to a Google search directly in a discussion. You can also use links to predefine an entire search session, and then use a tool like WP:LINKY to open the searches all at once into separate web browser tabs. Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Read more: Using external search engines   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Kamen Rider × Kamen Rider OOO & W Featuring Skull: Movie War Core Survivor: Fans vs. Survivors Océane Dodin Hari Singh Durga Puja More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Valentyn Prodaievych Rugby union in Saudi Arabia ACEs in Latinx Populations Mike Omotosho Amal Taha More... • Learn how Update with new information The Salt of Tears Carina, Queensland Johanna Moore Wiser.org History of machine translation More... • Learn how Expand short articles Ghangha Pur Chak 382 GB Sarwarwali Awagat Johal, Faisalabad Gobind Pura More... • Learn how Check and add references Hypersonic effect 2020 Delhi riots The Dice Man Hajjam Parris Jeyaraj More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Wait 'Till the Sun Shines, Nellie Affinity group Circular economy William Campbell (actor) PictBridge More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Contingent self-esteem List of awards and nominations received by Pink Floyd Chesson's index 2019 Australian Open – Wheelchair Quad Singles 405-line transmitters of the United Kingdom More... • Learn how Add an image Tikabali Tache Avenue, Winnipeg The Boundary (shopping centre) The Milky Way (amusement park) Transport in Mauritius More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Sayuti Melik Pierre Malinowski Bashkir alphabet Klootschieten Álvaro Uribe More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Geography of Iceland Previous selections: Air sports · Isabel Adrian · Postmodernism This week's backlog of the week is: Category:Articles to be merged Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Recent changes Most large file uploads errors that had messages like "stashfailed" or "DBQueryError" have now been fixed. An incident report is available. Problems Sometimes, edits made on iOS using the visual editor save groups of numbers as telephone number links, because of a feature in the operating system. This problem is under investigation. [1] There was a problem with search last week. Many search requests did not work for 2 hours because of a configuration error. [2] Changes later this week The new version of MediaWiki will be on test wikis and MediaWiki.org from 16 November. It will be on non-Wikipedia wikis and some Wikipedias from 17 November. It will be on all wikis from 18 November (calendar). Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages Questions period for Arbitration Committee elections RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Grey's Anatomy (season 17) UEFA Euro 2020 Final Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Municipalities of San Luis Potosí world number one snooker players Bong Joon-ho filmography 1951 in spaceflight Pictures Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Dewey Arch Peanuts Viviparus georgianus The Burning of the Houses of Lords and Commons Portrait of Adeline Ravoux The Large Plane Trees Chlamys varia, right valve Chlamys varia, left valve SHRIMP device in its shot cab Agha Bozorg Mosque Museu de les Ciències Príncipe Felipe Tip of the day Tip of the day... How to provide a Google search in a link Here is an example of a link which activates a Google search: Tip of the day, on Wikipedia It was built using this wikilink: [[google:"Tip of the day"+site:en.wikipedia.org|Tip of the day, on Wikipedia]] Sometimes it is useful to place a link to a Google search directly in a discussion. You can also use links to predefine an entire search session, and then use a tool like WP:LINKY to open the searches all at once into separate web browser tabs. Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Read more: Using external search engines   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Jatayu Conservation Breeding Centre, Pinjore Ronot society Kuruvilla Pandikattu Máximo Pacheco Matte Charles Manson More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks 1990 Lewisham London Borough Council election Marie Selby Ryu Shiva Sub Rosa (band) 2013 German Formula Three Championship More... • Learn how Update with new information Shane Casey (hurler) Direct Edge TG4 Wigan Coal and Iron Company NRL Under-20s teams More... • Learn how Expand short articles Master of the Washington Coronation Antonio DeVity Expressionist Master of Santa Chiara Master of San Torpè Piero da Rimini More... • Learn how Check and add references Howard Krein Loony left Indonesian People's Revolutionary Front Erechthias mystacinella Bard (Soviet Union) More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Scotlandwell Wireless USB Technopaganism Saku Brewery Jess Roden More... • Learn how Improve lead sections SyncToy Trespass to land War Devils Magnitude condition Kaise Kaise Rishte More... • Learn how Add an image The Boundary (shopping centre) The Milky Way (amusement park) Tawa Reservoir Transport in Sudan Texas State Highway Loop 13 More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Chiquet Mawet AG Neovo Onggi Centrist Democrat International La mamá del 10 More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Geography of Iceland Previous selections: Air sports · Isabel Adrian · Postmodernism This week's backlog of the week is: Category:Articles to be merged Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Recent changes Most large file uploads errors that had messages like "stashfailed" or "DBQueryError" have now been fixed. An incident report is available. Problems Sometimes, edits made on iOS using the visual editor save groups of numbers as telephone number links, because of a feature in the operating system. This problem is under investigation. [1] There was a problem with search last week. Many search requests did not work for 2 hours because of a configuration error. [2] Changes later this week The new version of MediaWiki will be on test wikis and MediaWiki.org from 16 November. It will be on non-Wikipedia wikis and some Wikipedias from 17 November. It will be on all wikis from 18 November (calendar). Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages Questions period for Arbitration Committee elections RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Grey's Anatomy (season 17) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Municipalities of San Luis Potosí world number one snooker players Bong Joon-ho filmography Pictures Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Dewey Arch Peanuts Viviparus georgianus The Burning of the Houses of Lords and Commons Portrait of Adeline Ravoux The Large Plane Trees Chlamys varia, right valve Chlamys varia, left valve SHRIMP device in its shot cab Agha Bozorg Mosque Museu de les Ciències Príncipe Felipe Tip of the day Tip of the day... A comprehensive index for editors Sometimes, it might be useful to look up a subject in the same way you would do so in a book?—?in the index. Wikipedia has an index. To use it?—?it is available at the editor's index to Wikipedia. Although it is called an "editor's index", it is really intended to be an index for anyone involved with Wikipedia in other than the role of a reader. Most of the topics are directly relevant to editing of articles, but some topics are less directly relevant to editing. Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Read more: Editor assistance   Wikipedia:Help hub   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Jatayu Conservation Breeding Centre, Pinjore Ronot society Kuruvilla Pandikattu Máximo Pacheco Matte Charles Manson More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks 1990 Lewisham London Borough Council election Marie Selby Ryu Shiva Sub Rosa (band) 2013 German Formula Three Championship More... • Learn how Update with new information Shane Casey (hurler) Direct Edge TG4 Wigan Coal and Iron Company NRL Under-20s teams More... • Learn how Expand short articles Master of the Washington Coronation Antonio DeVity Expressionist Master of Santa Chiara Master of San Torpè Piero da Rimini More... • Learn how Check and add references Howard Krein Loony left Indonesian People's Revolutionary Front Erechthias mystacinella Bard (Soviet Union) More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Scotlandwell Wireless USB Technopaganism Saku Brewery Jess Roden More... • Learn how Improve lead sections SyncToy Trespass to land War Devils Magnitude condition Kaise Kaise Rishte More... • Learn how Add an image The Boundary (shopping centre) The Milky Way (amusement park) Tawa Reservoir Transport in Sudan Texas State Highway Loop 13 More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Chiquet Mawet AG Neovo Onggi Centrist Democrat International La mamá del 10 More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Geography of Iceland Previous selections: Air sports · Isabel Adrian · Postmodernism This week's backlog of the week is: Category:Articles to be merged Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Recent changes Most large file uploads errors that had messages like "stashfailed" or "DBQueryError" have now been fixed. An incident report is available. Problems Sometimes, edits made on iOS using the visual editor save groups of numbers as telephone number links, because of a feature in the operating system. This problem is under investigation. [1] There was a problem with search last week. Many search requests did not work for 2 hours because of a configuration error. [2] Changes later this week The new version of MediaWiki will be on test wikis and MediaWiki.org from 16 November. It will be on non-Wikipedia wikis and some Wikipedias from 17 November. It will be on all wikis from 18 November (calendar). Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages Questions period for Arbitration Committee elections RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Grey's Anatomy (season 17) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Municipalities of San Luis Potosí world number one snooker players Bong Joon-ho filmography Pictures Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Dewey Arch Peanuts Viviparus georgianus The Burning of the Houses of Lords and Commons Portrait of Adeline Ravoux The Large Plane Trees Chlamys varia, right valve Chlamys varia, left valve SHRIMP device in its shot cab Agha Bozorg Mosque Museu de les Ciències Príncipe Felipe Tip of the day Tip of the day... A comprehensive index for editors Sometimes, it might be useful to look up a subject in the same way you would do so in a book?—?in the index. Wikipedia has an index. To use it?—?it is available at the editor's index to Wikipedia. Although it is called an "editor's index", it is really intended to be an index for anyone involved with Wikipedia in other than the role of a reader. Most of the topics are directly relevant to editing of articles, but some topics are less directly relevant to editing. Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Read more: Editor assistance   Wikipedia:Help hub   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Hyperandrogenism Kim Jo-sun (politician) Princess Aurora (TV series) Vekkalam Sun Dawu More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Laws of the 15th Congress of the Philippines General Authority of Youth and Sports Welfare German Somali Coast List of North American opera companies Lee Su-chang More... • Learn how Update with new information Guangzhou–Shenzhen railway 2012 Nordic Figure Skating Championships The Big Bend Gambela Region 15th MMC – Pleven More... • Learn how Expand short articles Centaurs (film) Ruslan and Ludmila (film) Farewell to St. Petersburg (film) Where Were You, Odysseus? Teens in the Universe More... • Learn how Check and add references Grafton, North Dakota Hajjam HMS Rothesay (F107) Axon terminal 1st Arkansas Cavalry Battalion (Stirman's) More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Mieussy The Reverberator Technopaganism Jess Roden Ultrajectine More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Aurel Kolnai Joseph McManners Muscular evolution in humans 2009 Serbia Open – Doubles Career Colleges Ontario More... • Learn how Add an image The Milky Way (amusement park) Tawa Reservoir Texas State Highway Loop 13 Tangub Transport in Paraguay More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Sansha Town Alphonse de Lamartine AG Neovo Onggi Martin Dobrovi? More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Geography of Iceland Previous selections: Air sports · Isabel Adrian · Postmodernism This week's backlog of the week is: Category:Articles to be merged Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Recent changes Most large file uploads errors that had messages like "stashfailed" or "DBQueryError" have now been fixed. An incident report is available. Problems Sometimes, edits made on iOS using the visual editor save groups of numbers as telephone number links, because of a feature in the operating system. This problem is under investigation. [1] There was a problem with search last week. Many search requests did not work for 2 hours because of a configuration error. [2] Changes later this week The new version of MediaWiki will be on test wikis and MediaWiki.org from 16 November. It will be on non-Wikipedia wikis and some Wikipedias from 17 November. It will be on all wikis from 18 November (calendar). Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages Questions period for Arbitration Committee elections RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Grey's Anatomy (season 17) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Municipalities of San Luis Potosí world number one snooker players Bong Joon-ho filmography Pictures C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Dewey Arch Peanuts Viviparus georgianus The Burning of the Houses of Lords and Commons Portrait of Adeline Ravoux The Large Plane Trees Chlamys varia, right valve Chlamys varia, left valve Tip of the day Tip of the day... Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor you may be wondering, "How can I help?" and be overwhelmed by the extent and scope of the entire Wikipedia project. An introduction for new contributors is available at Help:Getting started which provides a self-guided road map of tutorials, introductions, training topics and other resources allowing you to learn more about how you can help improve the Wikipedia project. Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Read more: Contributing to Wikipedia   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Ronot society Vikas Dubey Tustin High School Han Kuangsi Rillo de Gallo More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Mycobacterium orygis Iambakey Okuk Rugby union in Saudi Arabia 2013–14 Raja Casablanca season World3 nonrenewable resource sector More... • Learn how Update with new information Shane Casey (hurler) Strauss–Howe generational theory Guangzhou–Shenzhen railway Party leaders of the House of Representatives of Puerto Rico Sustainable Development Goals and Lebanon More... • Learn how Expand short articles Famatanca Los Balverdi Antofagasta de la Sierra, Catamarca Cerro Colorados Apoyaco More... • Learn how Check and add references Lester Coleman William E. McLellin History of Colorado Springs, Colorado Soroka Medical Center Evolution of domestic goats More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Mike Tyson vs. Andrew Golota List of South Australian commercial icons Avatar: The Last Airbender – The Rift William Blake's mythology The Box (American TV channel) More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Chithira Thirunal Balarama Varma Disappearance of Trevor Deely Roger D'Astous Much Ado About Nothing Protestant culture More... • Learn how Add an image The Milky Way (amusement park) Tawa Reservoir Texas State Highway Loop 13 Tangub Transport in Paraguay More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Basilica and Convent of Nuestra Señora de la Merced Sayuti Melik Hassan Ali Nokhodaki Isfahani Chiquet Mawet Timeline of reactions to the Hong Kong national security law (April 2021) More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Geography of Iceland Previous selections: Air sports · Isabel Adrian · Postmodernism This week's backlog of the week is: Category:Articles to be merged Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Recent changes Most large file uploads errors that had messages like "stashfailed" or "DBQueryError" have now been fixed. An incident report is available. Problems Sometimes, edits made on iOS using the visual editor save groups of numbers as telephone number links, because of a feature in the operating system. This problem is under investigation. [1] There was a problem with search last week. Many search requests did not work for 2 hours because of a configuration error. [2] Changes later this week The new version of MediaWiki will be on test wikis and MediaWiki.org from 16 November. It will be on non-Wikipedia wikis and some Wikipedias from 17 November. It will be on all wikis from 18 November (calendar). Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages Questions period for Arbitration Committee elections RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Grey's Anatomy (season 17) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Municipalities of San Luis Potosí world number one snooker players Bong Joon-ho filmography Pictures C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Dewey Arch Peanuts Viviparus georgianus The Burning of the Houses of Lords and Commons Portrait of Adeline Ravoux The Large Plane Trees Chlamys varia, right valve Chlamys varia, left valve Tip of the day Tip of the day... Welcome to Wikipedia! As a new editor you may be wondering, "How can I help?" and be overwhelmed by the extent and scope of the entire Wikipedia project. An introduction for new contributors is available at Help:Getting started which provides a self-guided road map of tutorials, introductions, training topics and other resources allowing you to learn more about how you can help improve the Wikipedia project. Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Read more: Contributing to Wikipedia   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Polycentric networks Hari Singh Ban Phou Pheung Noi Shirur, Maharashtra Clinical engineering More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Pskov State University 2009 Open GDF Suez – Singles Syrian Centre for Policy and Research Liberal Women's Council Tamworth Rugby Union Sporting Club More... • Learn how Update with new information Catherine Violet Hubbard Animal Sanctuary Ukrainian Aviation Group 75D/Kohoutek GeneXpert MTB/RIF Washington Football Team records More... • Learn how Expand short articles Big Spring Country Club Ron Finley Stadium Louisville Motor Speedway Dizzy Peyton Dr. Mark & Cindy Lynn Stadium More... • Learn how Check and add references Grand Mufti Ennepe Alfredo Ottaviani Geothermal gradient Ashkelon More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Avatar: The Last Airbender – The Rift Mario Benjamín Menéndez New American Writing Windsurfing Chiemsee Produktions v Boots L.A. Street Racing More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Right to life Symmes Purchase Thou shalt not commit adultery Liquid carbon dioxide Athletics at the 2003 All-Africa Games – Women's 400 metres More... • Learn how Add an image Texas State Highway Loop 13 Tangub Transport in Ireland Telecommunications in Nigeria Tata Institute of Fundamental Research More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic Delmira Agustini Medal Álvaro Uribe Fórmula Truck 21. Peron More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Wholesaling Previous selections: Geography of Iceland · Air sports · Isabel Adrian This week's backlog of the week is: Category:Articles to be merged Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Eligible users are invited to vote on candidates for the Arbitration Committee until 23:59 December 6, 2021 (UTC). Candidate statements can be seen here. Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Changes later this week There is no new MediaWiki version this week. The template dialog in VisualEditor and in the new wikitext mode Beta feature will be heavily improved on a few wikis. Your feedback is welcome. Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Voting in the Arbitration Committee elections Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages RfA reform Portal links on the main page Discussion on reliability of GEONet Names Server For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Cerro Blanco (volcano) Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists plant family names with etymologies blues standards accolades received by The Hateful Eight Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Pictures Bactrian princess Danube Delta Common darter Acraea terpsicore C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Dewey Arch Peanuts Viviparus georgianus The Burning of the Houses of Lords and Commons Tip of the day Tip of the day... Permission requests Many editors often wonder how to request permission to use an image they found somewhere, or a section of text from another source. Try using one of the permission request templates created specifically for this purpose so that you do not have to fuss with all the details. Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Read more: Wikipedia:Example requests for permission   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Polycentric networks Hari Singh Ban Phou Pheung Noi Shirur, Maharashtra Clinical engineering More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Pskov State University 2009 Open GDF Suez – Singles Syrian Centre for Policy and Research Liberal Women's Council Tamworth Rugby Union Sporting Club More... • Learn how Update with new information Catherine Violet Hubbard Animal Sanctuary Ukrainian Aviation Group 75D/Kohoutek GeneXpert MTB/RIF Washington Football Team records More... • Learn how Expand short articles Big Spring Country Club Ron Finley Stadium Louisville Motor Speedway Dizzy Peyton Dr. Mark & Cindy Lynn Stadium More... • Learn how Check and add references Grand Mufti Ennepe Alfredo Ottaviani Geothermal gradient Ashkelon More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Avatar: The Last Airbender – The Rift Mario Benjamín Menéndez New American Writing Windsurfing Chiemsee Produktions v Boots L.A. Street Racing More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Right to life Symmes Purchase Thou shalt not commit adultery Liquid carbon dioxide Athletics at the 2003 All-Africa Games – Women's 400 metres More... • Learn how Add an image Texas State Highway Loop 13 Tangub Transport in Ireland Telecommunications in Nigeria Tata Institute of Fundamental Research More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic Delmira Agustini Medal Álvaro Uribe Fórmula Truck 21. Peron More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Wholesaling Previous selections: Geography of Iceland · Air sports · Isabel Adrian This week's backlog of the week is: Category:Articles to be merged Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Eligible users are invited to vote on candidates for the Arbitration Committee until 23:59 December 6, 2021 (UTC). Candidate statements can be seen here. Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Changes later this week There is no new MediaWiki version this week. The template dialog in VisualEditor and in the new wikitext mode Beta feature will be heavily improved on a few wikis. Your feedback is welcome. Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Voting in the Arbitration Committee elections Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages RfA reform Portal links on the main page Discussion on reliability of GEONet Names Server For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Cerro Blanco (volcano) Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists plant family names with etymologies blues standards accolades received by The Hateful Eight Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Pictures Bactrian princess Danube Delta Common darter Acraea terpsicore C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Dewey Arch Peanuts Viviparus georgianus The Burning of the Houses of Lords and Commons Tip of the day Tip of the day... Permission requests Many editors often wonder how to request permission to use an image they found somewhere, or a section of text from another source. Try using one of the permission request templates created specifically for this purpose so that you do not have to fuss with all the details. Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Read more: Wikipedia:Example requests for permission   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Tawag ng Tanghalan Vodafone Italy Bride buying in India Kuala Lumpur 2002–03 FC Basel season More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Ovation Guitar Company Marie Selby Substitutes for Leadership Theory Mandaragirau List of FIFA World Cup records and statistics More... • Learn how Update with new information Atko Väikmeri Mark Haskins Apple Filing Protocol Katherine Anne Porter School Biedenkopf More... • Learn how Expand short articles Robert Kearns (musician) Merle Allin Chris Estes David LaBruyere Joseph "Lucky" Scott More... • Learn how Check and add references War of 1812 Leintz Gatzaga Rhapta Geothermal gradient Fournier More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Tales from the Thousand Lakes Highway Hi-Fi Stephenville North and South Texas Railway Pocket (military) Debate More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Paradigm Surjit Khan 2006 Dhivehi League Neatnik Saucer Kidnapping and killing of Jee Ick-Joo More... • Learn how Add an image Tangub Transport in Ireland Telecommunications in Nigeria Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Triangle Island More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Antoine Loysel Baidu Tieba Alphonse de Lamartine Portuguesa (state) Klootschieten More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Wholesaling Previous selections: Geography of Iceland · Air sports · Isabel Adrian This week's backlog of the week is: Category:All articles to be split Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Eligible users are invited to vote on candidates for the Arbitration Committee until 23:59 December 6, 2021 (UTC). Candidate statements can be seen here. Some editors have reported trouble accessing the vote server from mobile devices, if you have this issue please try from a desktop browser while this is being looked in to. Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Changes later this week There is no new MediaWiki version this week. The template dialog in VisualEditor and in the new wikitext mode Beta feature will be heavily improved on a few wikis. Your feedback is welcome. Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Reliability of GEONet Names Server Voting in the Arbitration Committee elections Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Cerro Blanco (volcano) Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists plant family names with etymologies blues standards accolades received by The Hateful Eight Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Pictures Valère Basilica Laothoe populi larva Gerty Cori Earthrise Bactrian princess Danube Delta Common darter Acraea terpsicore C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Tip of the day Tip of the day... Lead Section Size The lead section of a Wikipedia article is the section before the first heading. The table of contents, if displayed, generally appears between the lead section and the first subheading. Rule of thumb: If a topic deserves a heading or subheading, then it deserves short mention in the lead. The lead section should contain up to four paragraphs, depending on the length of the article, and should provide a preview of the main points the article will make, summarizing the primary reasons the subject matter is interesting or notable. The lead should be capable of standing alone as a concise overview of the article, should be written in a clear and accessible style, should be carefully sourced like the rest of the text, and should encourage the reader to want to read more. The following table has some general guidelines for the length of the lead section: < 15,000 characters medium size > 30,000 characters one or two paragraphs   two or three paragraphs   three or four paragraphs Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Summary essay: WP:CREATELEAD   Read more: Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Lead section   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Maryana Iskander Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Tawag ng Tanghalan Vodafone Italy Bride buying in India Kuala Lumpur 2002–03 FC Basel season More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Ovation Guitar Company Marie Selby Substitutes for Leadership Theory Mandaragirau List of FIFA World Cup records and statistics More... • Learn how Update with new information Atko Väikmeri Mark Haskins Apple Filing Protocol Katherine Anne Porter School Biedenkopf More... • Learn how Expand short articles Robert Kearns (musician) Merle Allin Chris Estes David LaBruyere Joseph "Lucky" Scott More... • Learn how Check and add references War of 1812 Leintz Gatzaga Rhapta Geothermal gradient Fournier More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Tales from the Thousand Lakes Highway Hi-Fi Stephenville North and South Texas Railway Pocket (military) Debate More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Paradigm Surjit Khan 2006 Dhivehi League Neatnik Saucer Kidnapping and killing of Jee Ick-Joo More... • Learn how Add an image Tangub Transport in Ireland Telecommunications in Nigeria Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Triangle Island More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Antoine Loysel Baidu Tieba Alphonse de Lamartine Portuguesa (state) Klootschieten More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Wholesaling Previous selections: Geography of Iceland · Air sports · Isabel Adrian This week's backlog of the week is: Category:All articles to be split Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Eligible users are invited to vote on candidates for the Arbitration Committee until 23:59 December 6, 2021 (UTC). Candidate statements can be seen here. Some editors have reported trouble accessing the vote server from mobile devices, if you have this issue please try from a desktop browser while this is being looked in to. Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Changes later this week There is no new MediaWiki version this week. The template dialog in VisualEditor and in the new wikitext mode Beta feature will be heavily improved on a few wikis. Your feedback is welcome. Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Reliability of GEONet Names Server Voting in the Arbitration Committee elections Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Cerro Blanco (volcano) Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists plant family names with etymologies blues standards accolades received by The Hateful Eight Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Pictures Valère Basilica Laothoe populi larva Gerty Cori Earthrise Bactrian princess Danube Delta Common darter Acraea terpsicore C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Tip of the day Tip of the day... Lead Section Size The lead section of a Wikipedia article is the section before the first heading. The table of contents, if displayed, generally appears between the lead section and the first subheading. Rule of thumb: If a topic deserves a heading or subheading, then it deserves short mention in the lead. The lead section should contain up to four paragraphs, depending on the length of the article, and should provide a preview of the main points the article will make, summarizing the primary reasons the subject matter is interesting or notable. The lead should be capable of standing alone as a concise overview of the article, should be written in a clear and accessible style, should be carefully sourced like the rest of the text, and should encourage the reader to want to read more. The following table has some general guidelines for the length of the lead section: < 15,000 characters medium size > 30,000 characters one or two paragraphs   two or three paragraphs   three or four paragraphs Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Summary essay: WP:CREATELEAD   Read more: Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Lead section   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Maryana Iskander Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Tawag ng Tanghalan Vodafone Italy Bride buying in India Kuala Lumpur 2002–03 FC Basel season More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Ovation Guitar Company Marie Selby Substitutes for Leadership Theory Mandaragirau List of FIFA World Cup records and statistics More... • Learn how Update with new information Atko Väikmeri Mark Haskins Apple Filing Protocol Katherine Anne Porter School Biedenkopf More... • Learn how Expand short articles Robert Kearns (musician) Merle Allin Chris Estes David LaBruyere Joseph "Lucky" Scott More... • Learn how Check and add references War of 1812 Leintz Gatzaga Rhapta Geothermal gradient Fournier More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Tales from the Thousand Lakes Highway Hi-Fi Stephenville North and South Texas Railway Pocket (military) Debate More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Paradigm Surjit Khan 2006 Dhivehi League Neatnik Saucer Kidnapping and killing of Jee Ick-Joo More... • Learn how Add an image Tangub Transport in Ireland Telecommunications in Nigeria Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Triangle Island More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Antoine Loysel Baidu Tieba Alphonse de Lamartine Portuguesa (state) Klootschieten More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Wholesaling Previous selections: Geography of Iceland · Air sports · Isabel Adrian This week's backlog of the week is: Category:All articles to be split Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Eligible users are invited to vote on candidates for the Arbitration Committee until 23:59 December 6, 2021 (UTC). Candidate statements can be seen here. Some editors have reported trouble accessing the vote server from mobile devices, if you have this issue please try from a desktop browser while this is being looked in to. Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Changes later this week There is no new MediaWiki version this week. The template dialog in VisualEditor and in the new wikitext mode Beta feature will be heavily improved on a few wikis. Your feedback is welcome. Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Reliability of GEONet Names Server Voting in the Arbitration Committee elections Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Cerro Blanco (volcano) Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists plant family names with etymologies blues standards accolades received by The Hateful Eight Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Pictures Valère Basilica Laothoe populi larva Gerty Cori Earthrise Bactrian princess Danube Delta Common darter Acraea terpsicore C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Tip of the day Tip of the day... Lead Section Size The lead section of a Wikipedia article is the section before the first heading. The table of contents, if displayed, generally appears between the lead section and the first subheading. Rule of thumb: If a topic deserves a heading or subheading, then it deserves short mention in the lead. The lead section should contain up to four paragraphs, depending on the length of the article, and should provide a preview of the main points the article will make, summarizing the primary reasons the subject matter is interesting or notable. The lead should be capable of standing alone as a concise overview of the article, should be written in a clear and accessible style, should be carefully sourced like the rest of the text, and should encourage the reader to want to read more. The following table has some general guidelines for the length of the lead section: < 15,000 characters medium size > 30,000 characters one or two paragraphs   two or three paragraphs   three or four paragraphs Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Summary essay: WP:CREATELEAD   Read more: Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Lead section   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Maryana Iskander Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Tawag ng Tanghalan Vodafone Italy Bride buying in India Kuala Lumpur 2002–03 FC Basel season More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Ovation Guitar Company Marie Selby Substitutes for Leadership Theory Mandaragirau List of FIFA World Cup records and statistics More... • Learn how Update with new information Atko Väikmeri Mark Haskins Apple Filing Protocol Katherine Anne Porter School Biedenkopf More... • Learn how Expand short articles Robert Kearns (musician) Merle Allin Chris Estes David LaBruyere Joseph "Lucky" Scott More... • Learn how Check and add references War of 1812 Leintz Gatzaga Rhapta Geothermal gradient Fournier More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Tales from the Thousand Lakes Highway Hi-Fi Stephenville North and South Texas Railway Pocket (military) Debate More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Paradigm Surjit Khan 2006 Dhivehi League Neatnik Saucer Kidnapping and killing of Jee Ick-Joo More... • Learn how Add an image Tangub Transport in Ireland Telecommunications in Nigeria Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Triangle Island More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Antoine Loysel Baidu Tieba Alphonse de Lamartine Portuguesa (state) Klootschieten More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Wholesaling Previous selections: Geography of Iceland · Air sports · Isabel Adrian This week's backlog of the week is: Category:All articles to be split Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Eligible users are invited to vote on candidates for the Arbitration Committee until 23:59 December 6, 2021 (UTC). Candidate statements can be seen here. Some editors have reported trouble accessing the vote server from mobile devices, if you have this issue please try from a desktop browser while this is being looked in to. Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Changes later this week There is no new MediaWiki version this week. The template dialog in VisualEditor and in the new wikitext mode Beta feature will be heavily improved on a few wikis. Your feedback is welcome. Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Reliability of GEONet Names Server Voting in the Arbitration Committee elections Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Cerro Blanco (volcano) Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists plant family names with etymologies blues standards accolades received by The Hateful Eight Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Pictures Valère Basilica Laothoe populi larva Gerty Cori Earthrise Bactrian princess Danube Delta Common darter Acraea terpsicore C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Tip of the day Tip of the day... Lead Section Size The lead section of a Wikipedia article is the section before the first heading. The table of contents, if displayed, generally appears between the lead section and the first subheading. Rule of thumb: If a topic deserves a heading or subheading, then it deserves short mention in the lead. The lead section should contain up to four paragraphs, depending on the length of the article, and should provide a preview of the main points the article will make, summarizing the primary reasons the subject matter is interesting or notable. The lead should be capable of standing alone as a concise overview of the article, should be written in a clear and accessible style, should be carefully sourced like the rest of the text, and should encourage the reader to want to read more. The following table has some general guidelines for the length of the lead section: < 15,000 characters medium size > 30,000 characters one or two paragraphs   two or three paragraphs   three or four paragraphs Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Summary essay: WP:CREATELEAD   Read more: Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Lead section   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Maryana Iskander Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Tawag ng Tanghalan Vodafone Italy Bride buying in India Kuala Lumpur 2002–03 FC Basel season More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Ovation Guitar Company Marie Selby Substitutes for Leadership Theory Mandaragirau List of FIFA World Cup records and statistics More... • Learn how Update with new information Atko Väikmeri Mark Haskins Apple Filing Protocol Katherine Anne Porter School Biedenkopf More... • Learn how Expand short articles Robert Kearns (musician) Merle Allin Chris Estes David LaBruyere Joseph "Lucky" Scott More... • Learn how Check and add references War of 1812 Leintz Gatzaga Rhapta Geothermal gradient Fournier More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Tales from the Thousand Lakes Highway Hi-Fi Stephenville North and South Texas Railway Pocket (military) Debate More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Paradigm Surjit Khan 2006 Dhivehi League Neatnik Saucer Kidnapping and killing of Jee Ick-Joo More... • Learn how Add an image Tangub Transport in Ireland Telecommunications in Nigeria Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Triangle Island More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Antoine Loysel Baidu Tieba Alphonse de Lamartine Portuguesa (state) Klootschieten More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Wholesaling Previous selections: Geography of Iceland · Air sports · Isabel Adrian This week's backlog of the week is: Category:All articles to be split Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Eligible users are invited to vote on candidates for the Arbitration Committee until 23:59 December 6, 2021 (UTC). Candidate statements can be seen here. Some editors have reported trouble accessing the vote server from mobile devices, if you have this issue please try from a desktop browser while this is being looked in to. Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Changes later this week There is no new MediaWiki version this week. The template dialog in VisualEditor and in the new wikitext mode Beta feature will be heavily improved on a few wikis. Your feedback is welcome. Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Reliability of GEONet Names Server Voting in the Arbitration Committee elections Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Cerro Blanco (volcano) Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists plant family names with etymologies blues standards accolades received by The Hateful Eight Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Pictures Valère Basilica Laothoe populi larva Gerty Cori Earthrise Bactrian princess Danube Delta Common darter Acraea terpsicore C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Tip of the day Tip of the day... Lead Section Size The lead section of a Wikipedia article is the section before the first heading. The table of contents, if displayed, generally appears between the lead section and the first subheading. Rule of thumb: If a topic deserves a heading or subheading, then it deserves short mention in the lead. The lead section should contain up to four paragraphs, depending on the length of the article, and should provide a preview of the main points the article will make, summarizing the primary reasons the subject matter is interesting or notable. The lead should be capable of standing alone as a concise overview of the article, should be written in a clear and accessible style, should be carefully sourced like the rest of the text, and should encourage the reader to want to read more. The following table has some general guidelines for the length of the lead section: < 15,000 characters medium size > 30,000 characters one or two paragraphs   two or three paragraphs   three or four paragraphs Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Summary essay: WP:CREATELEAD   Read more: Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Lead section   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Maryana Iskander Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Bride buying in India Joga Musahib Piracy kidnappings Salem District (Madras Presidency) Vigor (video game) More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks The Screen Savers Ijigban community Keezha Sarakkalvilai NIS illegal wiretapping scandal Naeem Ahmad Khan More... • Learn how Update with new information Teenage pregnancy Johanna Moore Red House Theater KDE Software Compilation Environmental aspects of the electric car More... • Learn how Expand short articles 1923 Chicago White Sox season 1943 Chicago White Sox season 1912 Chicago White Sox season 1911 Chicago White Sox season 1924 Chicago White Sox season More... • Learn how Check and add references Lovelock Aerial Gunnery Range Lester Coleman Folktronica Bausch & Lomb Cardiotocography More... • Learn how Fix original research issues G. M. Syed First tithe String (music) Jonathan Lee Riches List of Shotokan organizations More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Maritime Venice Music of Paraguay Exploratory blockmodeling GPS for the visually impaired American foulbrood More... • Learn how Add an image Tangub Transport in Ireland Telecommunications in Nigeria Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Triangle Island More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Stalag Luft II Karl Leopold von Möller Chiquet Mawet 2018 Colombian census Lindauer Psychotherapiewochen More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Wholesaling Previous selections: Geography of Iceland · Air sports · Isabel Adrian This week's backlog of the week is: Category:All articles to be split Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Eligible users are invited to vote on candidates for the Arbitration Committee until 23:59 December 6, 2021 (UTC). Candidate statements can be seen here. Some editors have reported trouble accessing the vote server from mobile devices, if you have this issue please try from a desktop browser while this is being looked in to. Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Changes later this week There is no new MediaWiki version this week. The template dialog in VisualEditor and in the new wikitext mode Beta feature will be heavily improved on a few wikis. Your feedback is welcome. Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Reliability of GEONet Names Server Voting in the Arbitration Committee elections Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Cerro Blanco (volcano) Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists plant family names with etymologies blues standards accolades received by The Hateful Eight Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Pictures Valère Basilica Laothoe populi larva Gerty Cori Earthrise Bactrian princess Danube Delta Common darter Acraea terpsicore C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Tip of the day Tip of the day... Lead Section Size The lead section of a Wikipedia article is the section before the first heading. The table of contents, if displayed, generally appears between the lead section and the first subheading. Rule of thumb: If a topic deserves a heading or subheading, then it deserves short mention in the lead. The lead section should contain up to four paragraphs, depending on the length of the article, and should provide a preview of the main points the article will make, summarizing the primary reasons the subject matter is interesting or notable. The lead should be capable of standing alone as a concise overview of the article, should be written in a clear and accessible style, should be carefully sourced like the rest of the text, and should encourage the reader to want to read more. The following table has some general guidelines for the length of the lead section: < 15,000 characters medium size > 30,000 characters one or two paragraphs   two or three paragraphs   three or four paragraphs Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Summary essay: WP:CREATELEAD   Read more: Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Lead section   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Maryana Iskander Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Yahgan people Cataphyll Ismail Berzeg Connexxus Women's Center/Centro de Mujeres Probe tip More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer awareness and prevention 2013 Arab Volleyball Clubs Champions Championship Staff function South African constitutional litigation Lee Su-chang More... • Learn how Update with new information Gode Santiago Light Rail Anti-Dumping Measures on Biodiesel by the European Union Flag Football World Championship Japanese Recession More... • Learn how Expand short articles Bela Hodod Sunday Night Sex Show The Rodman World Tour Teen Summit Hot Ticket More... • Learn how Check and add references Howard Krein Cerebro's X-Men Potemkin village LegendMUD Colin Jordan More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Circuito del Jarama PEG Link Mode Werckmeister Harmonies Sports Illustrated cover jinx Education in Mississippi More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Sylvia Kay Fukushima disaster cleanup Baba Shah Jamal 2014 Seguros Bolívar Open Barranquilla – Singles The Hunchback of Notre-Dame More... • Learn how Add an image Tangub Transport in Ireland Telecommunications in Nigeria Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Triangle Island More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Imandar Daurey Basilica and Convent of Nuestra Señora de la Merced National Meeting of Black Women Touche pas à mon poste ! The Legend of Luo Xiaohei More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Wholesaling Previous selections: Geography of Iceland · Air sports · Isabel Adrian This week's backlog of the week is: Category:All articles to be split Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Eligible users are invited to vote on candidates for the Arbitration Committee until 23:59 December 6, 2021 (UTC). Candidate statements can be seen here. Some editors have reported trouble accessing the vote server from mobile devices, if you have this issue please try from a desktop browser while this is being looked in to. Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Changes later this week There is no new MediaWiki version this week. The template dialog in VisualEditor and in the new wikitext mode Beta feature will be heavily improved on a few wikis. Your feedback is welcome. Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Reliability of GEONet Names Server Voting in the Arbitration Committee elections Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Cerro Blanco (volcano) Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists plant family names with etymologies blues standards accolades received by The Hateful Eight Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Pictures Valère Basilica Laothoe populi larva Gerty Cori Earthrise Bactrian princess Danube Delta Common darter Acraea terpsicore C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Tip of the day Tip of the day... Lead Section Size The lead section of a Wikipedia article is the section before the first heading. The table of contents, if displayed, generally appears between the lead section and the first subheading. Rule of thumb: If a topic deserves a heading or subheading, then it deserves short mention in the lead. The lead section should contain up to four paragraphs, depending on the length of the article, and should provide a preview of the main points the article will make, summarizing the primary reasons the subject matter is interesting or notable. The lead should be capable of standing alone as a concise overview of the article, should be written in a clear and accessible style, should be carefully sourced like the rest of the text, and should encourage the reader to want to read more. The following table has some general guidelines for the length of the lead section: < 15,000 characters medium size > 30,000 characters one or two paragraphs   two or three paragraphs   three or four paragraphs Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Summary essay: WP:CREATELEAD   Read more: Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Lead section   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Maryana Iskander Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Hyperandrogenism Apne Dam Par Cataphyll Skindergade 23 Durga Puja More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Transparency of media ownership in Romania Timi? 2 List of awards and nominations received by S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Sri Lankan Veterinarians Strike for Better Treatment of Elephants, 2010 Stanis?aw G??bi?ski More... • Learn how Update with new information Cairo-Cape Town Highway 2017 in Spain Wiser.org Dahan (solar term) North Pearsall, Texas More... • Learn how Expand short articles White Hollow (Iron County, Missouri) Sam Branch Ketcherside Mountain Womble Hollow Warren Hollow More... • Learn how Check and add references SS Yongala ZTE Atriplex Series expansion Fentanyl More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Service plan Una district LaserDisc Ultrajectine Close-ratio transmission More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Westcountry Rivers Trust Madame Zodiac Environmental migrant Tenchu: Shadow Assassins Mass media in Ireland More... • Learn how Add an image Tangub Transport in Ireland Telecommunications in Nigeria Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Triangle Island More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Stalag Luft II Max Müller (Danish army officer) Valentin Berestov Nilamber and Pitamber French Algeria More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Wholesaling Previous selections: Geography of Iceland · Air sports · Isabel Adrian This week's backlog of the week is: Category:All articles to be split Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Eligible users are invited to vote on candidates for the Arbitration Committee until 23:59 December 6, 2021 (UTC). Candidate statements can be seen here. Some editors have reported trouble accessing the vote server from mobile devices, if you have this issue please try from a desktop browser while this is being looked in to. Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Changes later this week There is no new MediaWiki version this week. The template dialog in VisualEditor and in the new wikitext mode Beta feature will be heavily improved on a few wikis. Your feedback is welcome. Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Reliability of GEONet Names Server Voting in the Arbitration Committee elections Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Cerro Blanco (volcano) Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists plant family names with etymologies blues standards accolades received by The Hateful Eight Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Pictures Valère Basilica Laothoe populi larva Gerty Cori Earthrise Bactrian princess Danube Delta Common darter Acraea terpsicore C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Tip of the day Tip of the day... Lead Section Size The lead section of a Wikipedia article is the section before the first heading. The table of contents, if displayed, generally appears between the lead section and the first subheading. Rule of thumb: If a topic deserves a heading or subheading, then it deserves short mention in the lead. The lead section should contain up to four paragraphs, depending on the length of the article, and should provide a preview of the main points the article will make, summarizing the primary reasons the subject matter is interesting or notable. The lead should be capable of standing alone as a concise overview of the article, should be written in a clear and accessible style, should be carefully sourced like the rest of the text, and should encourage the reader to want to read more. The following table has some general guidelines for the length of the lead section: < 15,000 characters medium size > 30,000 characters one or two paragraphs   two or three paragraphs   three or four paragraphs Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Summary essay: WP:CREATELEAD   Read more: Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Lead section   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Maryana Iskander Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Hyperandrogenism Apne Dam Par Cataphyll Skindergade 23 Durga Puja More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Transparency of media ownership in Romania Timi? 2 List of awards and nominations received by S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Sri Lankan Veterinarians Strike for Better Treatment of Elephants, 2010 Stanis?aw G??bi?ski More... • Learn how Update with new information Cairo-Cape Town Highway 2017 in Spain Wiser.org Dahan (solar term) North Pearsall, Texas More... • Learn how Expand short articles White Hollow (Iron County, Missouri) Sam Branch Ketcherside Mountain Womble Hollow Warren Hollow More... • Learn how Check and add references SS Yongala ZTE Atriplex Series expansion Fentanyl More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Service plan Una district LaserDisc Ultrajectine Close-ratio transmission More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Westcountry Rivers Trust Madame Zodiac Environmental migrant Tenchu: Shadow Assassins Mass media in Ireland More... • Learn how Add an image Tangub Transport in Ireland Telecommunications in Nigeria Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Triangle Island More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Stalag Luft II Max Müller (Danish army officer) Valentin Berestov Nilamber and Pitamber French Algeria More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Wholesaling Previous selections: Geography of Iceland · Air sports · Isabel Adrian This week's backlog of the week is: Category:All articles to be split Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Eligible users are invited to vote on candidates for the Arbitration Committee until 23:59 December 6, 2021 (UTC). Candidate statements can be seen here. Some editors have reported trouble accessing the vote server from mobile devices, if you have this issue please try from a desktop browser while this is being looked in to. Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Changes later this week There is no new MediaWiki version this week. The template dialog in VisualEditor and in the new wikitext mode Beta feature will be heavily improved on a few wikis. Your feedback is welcome. Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Reliability of GEONet Names Server Voting in the Arbitration Committee elections Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Cerro Blanco (volcano) Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists plant family names with etymologies blues standards accolades received by The Hateful Eight Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Pictures Valère Basilica Laothoe populi larva Gerty Cori Earthrise Bactrian princess Danube Delta Common darter Acraea terpsicore C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Tip of the day Tip of the day... Lead Section Size The lead section of a Wikipedia article is the section before the first heading. The table of contents, if displayed, generally appears between the lead section and the first subheading. Rule of thumb: If a topic deserves a heading or subheading, then it deserves short mention in the lead. The lead section should contain up to four paragraphs, depending on the length of the article, and should provide a preview of the main points the article will make, summarizing the primary reasons the subject matter is interesting or notable. The lead should be capable of standing alone as a concise overview of the article, should be written in a clear and accessible style, should be carefully sourced like the rest of the text, and should encourage the reader to want to read more. The following table has some general guidelines for the length of the lead section: < 15,000 characters medium size > 30,000 characters one or two paragraphs   two or three paragraphs   three or four paragraphs Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Summary essay: WP:CREATELEAD   Read more: Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Lead section   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Maryana Iskander Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal Wikipedia:Community portal - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Community portal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Place to find collaborations, tasks, and news about Wikimedia Community portal Dashboard Departments Maintenance Tasks Discord IRC Meetups Directories (Policies/Guidelines Essays How-to Index Noticeboards WikiProjects) Welcome to the Community portal! Shortcuts P:WP WP:COM This page provides a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news about English Wikipedia. New to Wikipedia? See the contributing to Wikipedia page or our tutorial for everything you need to know to get started. For a listing of internal project pages of interest, see the department directory. Interact more For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. Help desk Ask questions about how to use or edit Wikipedia The Teahouse Friendly help for newcomers Reference desk Ask research questions about any topic except Wikipedia itself WikiProjects Work with other editors on a shared area of interest Dispute resolution Get help resolving disputes Village pump sections (view all) Policy Discuss existing and proposed policies Technical Discuss technical issues about Wikipedia Proposals Discuss new proposals that are not policy-related Idea lab Incubate new ideas before formally proposing them WMF Discuss issues involving the Wikimedia Foundation Miscellaneous Post messages that do not fit into any other category Help out You can help improve the articles listed below! This list updates frequently, so check back here for more tasks to try. (See Wikipedia:Task Center for brief guides.) Fix spelling and grammar Hyperandrogenism Apne Dam Par Cataphyll Skindergade 23 Durga Puja More... • Learn how Fix wikilinks Transparency of media ownership in Romania Timi? 2 List of awards and nominations received by S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Sri Lankan Veterinarians Strike for Better Treatment of Elephants, 2010 Stanis?aw G??bi?ski More... • Learn how Update with new information Cairo-Cape Town Highway 2017 in Spain Wiser.org Dahan (solar term) North Pearsall, Texas More... • Learn how Expand short articles White Hollow (Iron County, Missouri) Sam Branch Ketcherside Mountain Womble Hollow Warren Hollow More... • Learn how Check and add references SS Yongala ZTE Atriplex Series expansion Fentanyl More... • Learn how Fix original research issues Service plan Una district LaserDisc Ultrajectine Close-ratio transmission More... • Learn how Improve lead sections Westcountry Rivers Trust Madame Zodiac Environmental migrant Tenchu: Shadow Assassins Mass media in Ireland More... • Learn how Add an image Tangub Transport in Ireland Telecommunications in Nigeria Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Triangle Island More... • Learn how Translate and clean up Stalag Luft II Max Müller (Danish army officer) Valentin Berestov Nilamber and Pitamber French Algeria More... • Learn how Help counter systemic bias by creating new articles on important women. Help improve popular pages, especially those of low quality. Community bulletin board This section is transcluded from Wikipedia:Community bulletin board. (edit | history) Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia Meetups ?? November 2021?+/- Kuala Lumpur 8 November 10, 2021 (2021-11-10) London 176 November 14, 2021 (2021-11-14) San Diego 78 November 21, 2021 (2021-11-21) UK virtual 6 November 25, 2021 (2021-11-25) BLT Online November 28, 2021 (2021-11-28) South Africa 13 November 27, 2021 (2021-11-27) ?? December 2021?+/- San Diego 79 December 5, 2021 (2021-12-05) Full Meetup Calendar • Events calendar on Meta For meetups in other languages, see the list on Meta 31 October 2021   From the editor: Different stories, same place News and notes: The sockpuppet who ran for adminship and almost succeeded In the media: China bans, and is there intelligent life on this planet? Opinion: A photo on Wikipedia can ruin your life Discussion report: Editors brainstorm and propose changes to the Requests for adminship process Recent research: Welcome messages fail to improve newbie retention Community view: Reflections on the Chinese Wikipedia Traffic report: James Bond and the Giant Squid Game Technology report: Wikimedia Toolhub, winners of the Coolest Tool Award, and more Serendipity: How Wikipedia helped create a Serbian stamp Book review: Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality WikiProject report: Redirection Humour: A very Wiki crossword Single page Front page About Subscribe Suggestions Archives This week's article for improvement is: Wholesaling Previous selections: Geography of Iceland · Air sports · Isabel Adrian This week's backlog of the week is: Category:All articles to be split Active Wiki Fixup Projects Article Rescue Squadron Bluelink patrol Broken section links Check Wikipedia Cleanup Dead-end pages Disambig pages w/ links Fix common mistakes Free images to Commons Geo-coordinates Missing articles Most-wanted articles Notability Orphaned articles Red Link Recovery Reliability Requested articles Single editor Spell check Stubsensor Articles for improvement Uncategorised articles Unreferenced articles Wikification needed Main · Inactive · Mini v t e General notices Eligible users are invited to vote on candidates for the Arbitration Committee until 23:59 December 6, 2021 (UTC). Candidate statements can be seen here. Some editors have reported trouble accessing the vote server from mobile devices, if you have this issue please try from a desktop browser while this is being looked in to. Do you have need for a specialized script that doesn't exist yet, or have an idea for a cool new script or gadget? Post requests and ideas at Wikipedia:User scripts/Requests. Projects seeking help Also consider posting WikiProject, Task Force, and Collaboration news at the Signpost's WikiProject Report page. WikiProject Albums' backlog elimination drive is an attempt to reduce Category:Album infoboxes lacking a cover, which currently has 24,000 entries. Participation welcome! Wikipedia:WikiProject Idaho - Bringing it back to life; maybe the Portal:Idaho also. Mjquinn_id (talk) 20:45, 5 August 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Zoo - Reviving this, any help is appreciated. -- PaleoMatt (talk) 17:10, 5 September 2021 (UTC) WikiProjects and Task Forces WikiProject Go, announces a new portal for the game of Go. WikiProject Sweep, which aims to comprehensively review every article created in Wikipedia's early days to ensure basic conformity to modern standards, has been launched following a successful proposal at the WikiProject Council. The Wikipedia Help Project seeks assistance expanding and improving the Task Center and other pages within the Help namespace. WikiProject Abandoned Drafts Stale draft drive. An ongoing drive dedicated to reducing the amount of stale user space drafts. Options are to delete, redirect, move to mainspace or blank. Stop by and help the drive out! WikiProject Spoken Wikipedia is looking for people who are interested in helping out in our project to get our articles into an audio format that can be used for any number of uses including, but not limited to, visually impaired or people who just prefer to listen to the article instead of reading it for whatever reason they choose. You can sign up here on our participant's page. We are also in need of native or fluent speakers so that everything is pronounced properly. You can sign up for the Pronunciation task force by adding your name as well as your languages of fluency to section 2. Technical news This section is transcluded from Template:Latest tech news. (edit | history) Latest tech news from the Wikimedia technical community. Please tell other users about these changes. Not all changes will affect you. Translations are available. Changes later this week There is no new MediaWiki version this week. The template dialog in VisualEditor and in the new wikitext mode Beta feature will be heavily improved on a few wikis. Your feedback is welcome. Tech news prepared by Tech News writers and posted by bot • Contribute • Translate • Get help • Give feedback • Subscribe or unsubscribe. Group efforts and monthly projects Monthly projects Guild of Copy Editors' editing drive. The November 2021 backlog drive is a one-month-long effort of the Guild of Copy Editors to reduce the backlog of articles that require copy editing; those carrying the {{copy edit}} tag (also {{awkward}}, {{copy edit section}}, {{inappropriate person}}, and {{copy edit inline}} and their redirects) or listed on the GOCE Requests page. It began on 1 November 2021, 00:00 (UTC), and ends 30 November 2021, 23:59 (UTC). Ongoing group efforts The 100,000 Challenge. The quest to bring about 100,000 article improvements and creations globally through a series of 50,000/10,000/1000 Challenges for different regions and countries. This is a loose challenge, a list will not be maintained here, but the components will function independently on each of the subpages. Will be updated every week or two. The 50,000 Destubbing Challenge is a long term challenge to destub 50,000 articles on English Wikipedia for every country and topic. It may take decades to accomplish, it may take ten years, it all depends on how many people actively contribute. Page used for announcements towards the community members of the project Wikipedia:WikiCup. The WikiCup is a championship that has taken place every year on Wikipedia since 2007. The Cup is played and won by skill of editing. The purpose of the Cup is to encourage content creation and improvement and make editing on Wikipedia more fun. There is a new round every month, until the current contest ends; below are the details. May 1 to June 28 – 32 contestants left. July 1 to August 29 – 16 contestants left. September 1 to October 31 – 8 finalists left, the contestant with the highest score will win! Monthly contest, WikiProject Military history. The contest department of the Military history WikiProject aims to motivate increased quality in military history articles by offering a form of friendly competition for project members making improvements to them. The primary contest available is a simple rolling competition that awards points for improving articles. The contest runs from the first to last day of each month. WikiProject Medicine Collaboration of the Month. Every month, a topic will be selected from this page that will be the focus of editing for some members of Wikipedia:WikiProject Medicine. The article may or may not yet exist. Topics may either relate to medical basic sciences (anatomy, biochemistry, and so on), or clinical medicine (illnesses, surgical procedures, and so on). Table for group projects, by Wikiproject Wiki project name Individual projects Women in Red 2021 March: Art+ActivismVisibleWikiWomen 2021 Q1 contest: Africa contest 2021 global initiatives: #1day1woman2021 Women's rights Upcoming Remote Events, Discussions, and Conferences via electronic formats Discussions and collaborations Centralized discussion Village pumps policy tech proposals idea lab WMF misc Reliability of GEONet Names Server Voting in the Arbitration Committee elections Allowing the talk header template on new talk pages RfA reform Portal links on the main page For a listing of ongoing discussions, see the dashboard. view edit history watch archive talk purge Discussions in the following areas have requested wider attention via Requests for comment: Biographies Economy and trade History and geography Language and linguistics Media, the arts, and architecture Politics, government, and law Religion and philosophy Science and mathematics Society, sports, and culture Wikipedia policies and guidelines Wikipedia style and naming WikiProjects and collaborations Wikipedia technical issues and templates Wikipedia proposals Unsorted See also Dashboard News Goings-on Meetups In the media Mailing lists Newest featured content Articles Cerro Blanco (volcano) Seventy-Six (novel) Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Hoodoo Mountain Battle of Hayes Pond Operation Sportpalast Capture of Sedalia 1998–99 Gillingham F.C. season British logistics in the Siegfried Line campaign Viatkogorgon Truce of Calais Old Exe Bridge Ghostbusters Black-and-red broadbill Red (Taylor Swift album) Topics Hundred Years' War, 1345–1347 Gillingham F.C. Burnley F.C. Tour Championship (snooker) Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy 2018 Pacific hurricane season Overview of Harry Styles 1989 (Taylor Swift album) Ships of the Royal Yugoslav Navy Punic Wars Operas by Claudio Monteverdi Naruto volumes Silesian Wars 1st Army Group (Kingdom of Yugoslavia) Nashville Sounds Lists plant family names with etymologies blues standards accolades received by The Hateful Eight Regine Velasquez live performances United States presidential elections in Arizona United States presidential elections in Alaska Rihanna singles discography World Heritage Sites in Armenia Billboard number-one country songs Formula One Grands Prix Mersenne primes and perfect numbers bovids accolades received by Koi... Mil Gaya Karisma Kapoor filmography Billboard number-one country songs of 1958 Pictures Valère Basilica Laothoe populi larva Gerty Cori Earthrise Bactrian princess Danube Delta Common darter Acraea terpsicore C/1881 K1 Sea urchins American white pelican Snakelocks anemone Church of the Redeemer Ernest Rutherford The Red Cape Tip of the day Tip of the day... Lead Section Size The lead section of a Wikipedia article is the section before the first heading. The table of contents, if displayed, generally appears between the lead section and the first subheading. Rule of thumb: If a topic deserves a heading or subheading, then it deserves short mention in the lead. The lead section should contain up to four paragraphs, depending on the length of the article, and should provide a preview of the main points the article will make, summarizing the primary reasons the subject matter is interesting or notable. The lead should be capable of standing alone as a concise overview of the article, should be written in a clear and accessible style, should be carefully sourced like the rest of the text, and should encourage the reader to want to read more. The following table has some general guidelines for the length of the lead section: < 15,000 characters medium size > 30,000 characters one or two paragraphs   two or three paragraphs   three or four paragraphs Prior tip – Tips library – Next tip Summary essay: WP:CREATELEAD   Read more: Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Lead section   Become a Wikipedia tipster To add this auto-updating template to your user page, use {{totd}} Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Species directories from Wikispecies Travel guides from Wikivoyage News stories from Wikinews Definitions from Wiktionary Textbooks from Wikibooks Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Learning resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Wikipedia Overview (outline) Censorship Citation needed Conflict-of-interest editing Criticism Biases gender geographical ideological racial Deletion of articles Deletionism and inclusionism Notability Edit count Fact-checking "Ignore all rules" MediaWiki Predictions of the project's end Reliability Vandalism Community Administrators AfroCrowd Arbitration Committee Art+Feminism Bots Lsjbot Edit-a-thon List of Wikipedias The Signpost Wiki Indaba Wiki Loves Monuments Wiki Loves Pride WikiConference India WikiConference North America Wikimania Wikipedian in residence WikiProject Women in Red People Florence Devouard Sue Gardner James Heilman Maryana Iskander Katherine Maher Magnus Manske Erik Möller Ira Brad Matetsky Larry Sanger María Sefidari Lila Tretikov Jimmy Wales Wikipedians Wikimedian of the Year History Bomis Logo Controversies U.S. Congressional staff edits Essjay controversy Seigenthaler biography incident Henryk Batuta hoax Jar'Edo Wens hoax Croatian Wikipedia administration Internet Watch Foundation Scientology CAMERA campaign Italian Wikipedia blackout English Wikipedia blackout Hillsborough disaster Wikipedia posts MyWikiBiz VisualEditor #1Lib1Ref Coverage of American politics Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic 2021 WMF actions on the Chinese Wikipedia Honors 2008 Quadriga award Wikipedia Monument 2015 Erasmus Prize 2015 Princess of Asturias Award References and analysis Cultural Bibliography Films Academic studies Listen to Wikipedia Wiki-Watch Wikipediocracy WikiScanner Wikipedia Review Mobile access Apps QRpedia Wapedia WikiNodes Wikipedia Zero Wikiwand Content use Books LLC Boundless (company) DBpedia Deletionpedia Kiwix WikiReader Science information Health information Similar projects Interpedia Nupedia Citizendium Enciclopedia Libre Universal en Español Everipedia Veropedia List of online encyclopedias List of wikis Related The Iraq War: A Historiography of Wikipedia Changelogs Print Wikipedia Magna Carta (An Embroidery) Wiki rabbit hole Wikiracing 274301 Wikipedia Wikipedia for World Heritage Wikimedia Foundation movement List Category v t e Wikipedia editor navigation v t e Wikipedia key policies and guidelines (?) Five pillars Ignore all rules Content (?) P Verifiability No original research Neutral point of view What Wikipedia is not Biographies of living persons Copyright (Copyright violations) Image use Article titles G Notability Autobiography Citing sources Reliable sources Reliable sources (medicine) Do not include copies of lengthy primary sources Plagiarism Don't create hoaxes Fringe theories Patent nonsense External links Conduct (?) P Civility Consensus Harassment Vandalism Ignore all rules No personal attacks Ownership of content Edit warring Dispute resolution Sockpuppetry No legal threats Child protection Paid-contribution disclosure G Assume good faith Conflict of interest Disruptive editing Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point Etiquette Gaming the system Please do not bite the newcomers Courtesy vanishing Responding to threats of harm Talk page guidelines Signatures Deletion (?) P Deletion policy Proposed deletion Biographies Criteria for speedy deletion Attack page Oversight Revision deletion Enforcement (?) P Administrators Banning Blocking Page protection Editing (?) P Editing policy G Article size Be bold Disambiguation Hatnotes Broad-concept article Understandability Style Manual of Style Contents Accessibility Dates and numbers Images Layout Lead section Linking Lists Classification Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Template namespace Project content (?) G Project namespace WikiProjects User pages User boxes Shortcuts Subpages WMF (?) P Terms of Use List of policies Friendly space policy Licensing and copyright Privacy policy List of all policies and guidelines P: List of policies G: List of guidelines Summaries of values and principles v t e Manual of Style Overview Directory Tips Quiz Content Accessibility Biographies Disambiguation pages Infoboxes Linking Self-references Words to watch Formatting Abbreviations Capitalization Dates and numbers Pronunciation Proper names Spelling Text formatting Titles Images Captions Galleries Icons Images Layout Layout Lead section Tables Trivia sections Lists Embedded lists Lists Lists of works Road junctions Stand-alone lists Legal Legal Trademarks Arts Anime and manga Comics Film Lyrics and poetry Novels Television Video games Visual arts Writing about fiction Music Music Music samples Record charts Regional Canada China France Hawaii India Ireland Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Poland Singapore Trinidad and Tobago Religion Islam Latter Day Saints Science Chemistry Mathematics Medicine Taxonomy Sports Cue sports Snooker Related Article size Article titles Categories, lists, and navigation templates Categorization Citing sources Hatnotes Military history Signatures Subpages Talk page guidelines Template namespace Understandability User pages Wikimedia sister projects WikiProjects Search Category v t e Wikipedia accounts and governance Unregistered (IP) users Why create an account? Create an account Request an account IPs are human too IP addresses are not people IP hopper Registered users New account Logging in Reset passwords Username policy Changing username Usernames for administrator attention Unified login or SUL Alternate account Account security Password strength requirements User account security Personal security practices Two-factor authentication 2FA for AWB Committed identity On privacy, confidentiality and discretion Compromised accounts Blocks, bans, sanctions, global actions Blocking policy FAQ Admins guide Tools Autoblock Appealing a block Guide to appealing blocks UTRS Unblock Ticket Request System Blocking IP addresses Range blocks IPv6 Open proxies Banning policy ArbCom appeals Sanctions Personal sanctions General sanctions Discretionary sanctions and Log Essay Long-term abuse Standard offer Global actions Related to accounts Sockpuppetry Single-purpose account Sleeper account Vandalism-only account Wikibreak Enforcer Retiring Courtesy vanishing Clean start Quiet return User groups and global user groups Requests for permissions Admin instructions Admin guide Account creator PERM (Auto) confirmed PERM Autopatrolled PERM AutoWikiBrowser PERM Bot Request Edit filter helper Request Event coordinator PERM Extended confirmed PERM File mover PERM IP block exempt Request Mass message sender PERM New page reviewer PERM Page mover PERM Pending changes reviewer PERM Rollback PERM Template editor PERM Global rights policy OTRS Volunteer Response Team Advanced user groups Administrator RfA Bureaucrat RfB CheckUser and Oversight Request Edit filter manager Request Interface administrator Request Founder Importer Researcher Committees and related Arbitration Committee Bot approvals group Functionaries Clerks SPI clerks ArbCom clerks Governance Administration FAQ Formal organization Editorial oversight and control Quality control Wikimedia Foundation Board Founder's seat Meta-Wiki Proposals WikiProjects Elections Policies and guidelines Petitions Noticeboards Consensus Dispute resolution Reforms v t e Wikipedia community For a listing of current collaborations, tasks, and news, see the Community portal. For a listing of ongoing discussions and current requests, see the Dashboard. General community topics Administration News The Signpost Goings-on In the media Meetups Mailing lists Wikipedians Statistics The Wikipedia Library Centralized discussion Village pump Idea lab Policy Proposals Technical Miscellaneous WMF Bots Contents and grading Requested articles Most-wanted articles Images needing articles Articles needing images Articles for creation WP:AFC/R Creation Help Vital articles Articles for improvement Peer review Good article nominations Featured article candidates Lists Pictures Topics Article translation Pages Main Page Errors WikiProjects and collaborations Directory Culture and the arts Geographical History and society Science, technology and engineering Wikipedia assistance and tasks Patrols Recent changes Counter-Vandalism Unit Version 1.0 Editorial Team Accessibility Organizations category Awards and feedback Reward board Contests A nice cup of tea and a sit down Charitableness WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! Maintenance tasks Task Center Open tasks Backlog Category Admin category Edit requests Category Database reports Category tracker Dusty articles Special pages New pages Recent changes Controversial issues Administrators and noticeboards Administrators' noticeboard Incidents Edit warring Vandalism Admin dashboard Admin requests Closure Page protection User permissions Sockpuppets Open proxies Revision deletion Oversight Request Usernames Changing Title blacklist OTRS Bureaucrats' Requests for adminship and bureaucratship Arbitration Committee Requests Enforcement Content dispute resolution Requests for comment Third opinion Dispute resolution noticeboard Biographies of living persons Conflict of interest External links Fringe theories Neutral point of view No original research Reliable sources Other noticeboards and assistance Regional notice boards Requests for help Category Asking questions Teahouse Help desk Reference desk Adopt-a-user Copyright assistance Copyright investigations Text problems Media questions Resource requests Mergers History mergers Moves Page importation Spam Blacklist Whitelist Bots Education General sanctions Editor sanctions Long-term abuse Deletion discussions Guide Admin Today Articles Templates Files Categories Redirects Miscellany Speedy Proposed BLP Review Undeletion Arguments to avoid Arguments to make Article Rescue Elections and votings Requests for comment (meta) Wikimedia Foundation elections WP Democracy Voting is not evil Milestones Directories, indexes, and summaries Departments Edit summary legend Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Abbreviations Help Manual of Style Simplified Rules Five pillars Policies Guidelines Shortcuts Templates Citation templates Tips Today Tools Wiki markup Media Category Templates v t e Wikipedia essays Essays on building, editing, and deleting content Philosophy Articles must be written All Five Pillars are the same height Avoid vague introductions Be a reliable source Civil POV pushing Cohesion Competence is required Concede lost arguments Dissent is not disloyalty Don't lie Don't search for objections Editing Wikipedia is like visiting a foreign country Editors will sometimes be wrong Eight simple rules for editing our encyclopedia Explanationism External criticism of Wikipedia Here to build an encyclopedia Levels of competence Most ideas are bad Need Neutrality of sources Not editing because of Wikipedia restriction The one question Oversimplification Paradoxes Paraphrasing POV and OR from editors, sources, and fields Process is important Product, process, policy Purpose Reasonability rule Systemic bias There is no seniority Ten Simple Rules for Editing Wikipedia Tendentious editing The role of policies in collaborative anarchy The rules are principles Trifecta Wikipedia in brief Wikipedia is an encyclopedia Wikipedia is a community Article construction 100K featured articles Acronym overkill Advanced source searching Adding images improves the encyclopedia Advanced article editing Advanced table formatting Advanced template coding Advanced text formatting Alternatives to the "Expand" template Amnesia test A navbox on every page An unfinished house is a real problem Articles have a half-life Autosizing images Avoid mission statements Bare URLs Be neutral in form Beef up that first revision Blind men and an elephant BOLD, revert, discuss cycle Build content to endure Cherrypicking Chesterton's fence Children's lit, adult new readers, & large-print books Citation overkill Citation underkill Common-style fallacy Concept cloud Creating controversial content Criticisms of society may be consistent with NPOV and reliability Deprecated sources Dictionaries as sources Don't demolish the house while it's still being built Don't get hung up on minor details Don't hope the house will build itself Don't panic Don't revert due solely to "no consensus" Don't teach the controversy Editing on mobile devices Editors are not mindreaders Encourage the newcomers Endorsements (commercial) Featured articles may have problems Fruit of the poisonous tree Give an article a chance Identifying and using independent sources History sources Law sources Primary sources Science sources Style guides Tertiary sources Ignore STRONGNAT for date formats Inaccuracies in Wikipedia namespace Inaccuracy Introduction to structurism Link rot Mine a source Merge Test Minors and persons judged incompetent "Murder of" articles Not every story/event/disaster needs a biography Not everything needs a navbox Not everything needs a WikiProject Nothing is in stone Organizing disambiguation pages by subject area Permastub Potential, not just current state Presentism Principle of Some Astonishment Printability Pruning article revisions Publicists Put a little effort into it Restoring part of a reverted edit Robotic editing Sham consensus Specialized-style fallacy Stub Makers Run an edit-a-thon Temporary versions of articles Tertiary-source fallacy There is a deadline There is no deadline The deadline is now Understanding Wikipedia's content standards Walled garden What an article should not include Wikipedia is a work in progress Wikipedia is not a reliable source Wikipedia is not being written in an organized fashion The world will not end tomorrow Write the article first Writing better articles Writing article content Avoid thread mode Gender-neutral language Proseline Use feminine pronouns Write the article first Writing about women Writing better articles Removing or deleting content Adjectives in your recommendations AfD is not a war zone Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Arguments to avoid in deletion reviews Arguments to avoid in image deletion discussions Arguments to make in deletion discussions Avoid repeated arguments Before commenting in a deletion discussion But there must be sources! Confusing arguments mean nothing Content removal Counting and sorting are not original research Delete the junk Does deletion help? Don't attack the nominator Don't confuse stub status with non-notability Don't overuse shortcuts to policy and guidelines to win your argument Follow the leader How to save an article proposed for deletion I just don't like it Identifying blatant advertising Identifying test edits Immunity Keep it concise Liar liar pants on fire Nothing Nothing is clear Overzealous deletion Relisting can be abusive Relist bias The Heymann Standard Unopposed AFD discussion Wikipedia is not Whack-A-Mole Why was the page I created deleted? What to do if your article gets tagged for speedy deletion When in doubt, hide it in the woodwork No Encyclopedic Use Essays on civility The basics Accepting other users Apology Contributing to complicated discussions Divisiveness Edit at your own pace Encouraging the newcomers Enjoy yourself Expect no thanks High-functioning autism and Asperger's editors How to be civil Maintaining a friendly space Negotiation Obsessive–compulsive disorder editors Relationships with academic editors Thank you Too long; didn't read Truce Unblock perspectives We are all Wikipedians here Philosophy A weak personal attack is still wrong Advice for hotheads An uncivil environment is a poor environment Be the glue Beware of the tigers! Civility warnings Deletion as revenge Failure Forgive and forget It's not the end of the world Nobody cares Most people who disagree with you on content are not vandals Old-fashioned Wikipedian values Profanity, civility, and discussions Revert notification opt-out Shadowless Fists of Death! Staying cool when the editing gets hot The grey zone The last word There is no Divine Right Of Editors Most ideas are bad Nothing is clear The rules of polite discourse There is no common sense Two wrongs don't make a right Wikipedia is not about winning Writing for the opponent Reader Dos Argue better Assume good faith Assume the assumption of good faith Assume no clue Avoid personal remarks Avoid the word "vandal" Be excellent to one another Beyond civility Call a spade a spade Candor Deny recognition Desist Discussing cruft Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass Encourage full discussions Get over it How to lose Imagine others complexly Just drop it Keep it down to earth Mind your own business Say "MOBY" Read before commenting Settle the process first Don'ts ALPHABETTISPAGHETTI Civil POV pushing Cyberbullying Don't accuse someone of a personal attack for accusing of a personal attack Don't be a fanatic Don't be a jerk Don't be an ostrich Don't be ashamed Don't be a WikiBigot Don't be high-maintenance Don't be inconsiderate Don't be obnoxious Don't be prejudiced Don't be rude Don't be the Fun Police Don't bludgeon the process Don't call a spade a spade Don't call the kettle black Don't call things cruft Don't come down like a ton of bricks Don't cry COI Don't demand that editors solve the problems they identify Don't drink the consensus Kool-Aid Don't eat the troll's food Don't fight fire with fire Don't give a fuck Don't help too much Don't make a smarmy valediction part of your signature Don't remind others of past misdeeds Don't shout Don't spite your face Don't take the bait Don't template the regulars Don't throw your toys out of the pram Do not insult the vandals Griefing Nationalist editing No angry mastodons just madmen No Nazis No, you can't have a pony Passive aggression Please don't bite the newcomers POV railroad There are no oracles You can't squeeze blood from a turnip WikiRelations WikiBullying WikiCrime WikiHarassment WikiHate WikiLawyering WikiLove WikiPeace Essays on notability Advanced source searching All high schools can be notable Alternative outlets Arguments to avoid in deletion discussions Articles with a single source Avoid template creep Bare notability Big events make key participants notable Bombardment Businesses with a single location But it's true! Citation overkill Common sourcing mistakes Clones Coatrack Discriminate vs indiscriminate information Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity Every snowflake is unique Existence ? Notability Existence does not prove notability Extracting the meaning of significant coverage Fart Google searches and numbers High Schools Inclusion is not an indicator of notability Independent sources Inherent notability Insignificant Masking the lack of notability Make stubs News coverage does not decrease notability No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability No big loss No one cares about your garage band No one really cares Notability/Historical/Arguments Notability cannot be purchased Notability comparison test Notability is not a level playing field Notability is not a matter of opinion Notability is not relevance or reliability Notability means impact Notability points Notability sub-pages Notabilitymandering Not every single thing Donald Trump does deserves an article Obscurity ? Lack of notability Offline sources One hundred words One sentence does not an article make Other stuff exists Overreliance upon Google Perennial websites Pokémon test Read the source Reducing consensus to an algorithm Run-of-the-mill Significant coverage not required Solutions are mixtures and nothing else Subjective importance Third-party sources Trivial mentions Video links Vanispamcruftisement What BLP1E is not What is and is not routine coverage What notability is not What to include Wikipedia is not here to tell the world about your noble cause Humorous essays Anti-Wikipedian Asshole John rule Assume bad faith Assume faith Assume good wraith Assume stupidity Assume that everyone's assuming good faith, assuming that you are assuming good faith Avoid using preview button Avoid using wikilinks Bad Jokes and Other Deleted Nonsense BOLD, revert, revert, revert Boston Tea Party Barnstaritis Don't stuff beans up your nose Don't-give-a-fuckism Editcountitis Edits Per Day Editsummarisis Emerson Seven Ages of Editor, by Will E. Spear-Shake Go ahead, vandalize How many Wikipedians does it take to change a lightbulb? How to put up a straight pole by pushing it at an angle Is that even an essay? Newcomers are delicious, so go ahead and bite them Legal vandalism LTTAUTMAOK No climbing the Reichstag dressed as Spider-Man Oops Defense Please be a giant dick, so we can ban you Please bite the newbies R-e-s-p-e-c-t Requests for medication Requirements for adminship Rouge admin Rouge editor Sarcasm is really helpful Sausages for tasting The Night Before Wikimas The first rule of Wikipedia The Five Pillars of Untruth Things that should not be surprising The WikiBible Watchlistitis Why not create an account? You don't have to be mad to work here, but About essays About essays Essay guide Value of essays Difference between policies, guidelines and essays Don't cite essays as if they were policy Avoid writing redundant essays Finding an essay Quote your own essay Policies and guidelines About policies and guidelines Policies Guidelines How to contribute to Wikipedia guidance Policy writing is hard v t e Wikipedia help pages Visit the Teahouse or the Help desk for an interactive Q & A forum. FAQs (?) Reference desks (?) Noticeboards (?) Cheatsheet (?) Directories (?) About Wikipedia (?) Administration Purpose Principles Policies and guidelines What Wikipedia is not Disclaimer (parental advice) Making requests Who writes Wikipedia? Help for readers (?) FAQ Books Copyright Glossary Mobile access Navigation Other languages Searching Students Viewing media Contributing to Wikipedia (?) Advice for young editors Avoiding common mistakes Etiquette Simplified Manual of Style Simplified rule-set "Ignore all rules" "The rules are principles" Style-tips Tip of the day Your first article (article wizard) Getting started (?) Why create an account? Introductions by topic Graphics tutorials Picture tutorial IRC (live chat) tutorial VisualEditor user guide Dos and don'ts (?) Accessibility Biographies Biographies (living) Categorization Consensus Discussions Disambiguation Images Leads Links Lists References Tables Titles (of articles) How-to pages and information pages (?) Appealing blocks Article deletion Categories Citations/references Referencing for beginners Citation Style 1 Cite errors References and page numbers Convert Diff Editing Minor edit toolbar edit conflict Find sources Files Footnotes Image deletion Infoboxes Linking (link color) Logging in Merging Page name Renaming pages Redirect Passwords Email confirmation Reverting Simple vandalism cleanup Talk pages (archiving simple archiving) User contributions WP search protocol Coding (?) Wiki markup Barcharts Calculations Characters Columns Hidden text HTML Lists Magic words Music symbols Sections Sounds Tables Templates Transclusion URL Visual files Directories (?) Abbreviations Contents (Encyclopedia proper) Departments Editor's index Essays FAQs Glossary Guidelines Manual of Style Policies Tasks Tips Tools Missing Manual Ask for help on your talk page (?) v t e Wikipedia technical help Get personal technical help at the Teahouse, Help desk, Village pump (technical), talk pages or IRC. General technical help Browser notes Bypass cache Keyboard shortcuts Editing CharInsert Edit conflict Edit toolbar Reverting How to create a page IRC Tutorial Mobile access Multilingual support Page history Page information Page name Help Printing Software notices Editnotice Special Characters Entering User access levels VisualEditor User guide Special page-related Special page help Edit filter Emailing users Logging in Reset passwords Logs Moving a page Fixing cut-and-paste moves Notifications/Echo FAQ Page Curation Page import Pending changes Random pages Recent changes Related changes Searching Linksearch Tags User contributions Watchlist What links here Wikitext Wikitext Cheatsheet Columns Line-break handling Lists Magic words For beginners Conditional expressions Switch parser function Time function Redirects Sections and TOCs Tables Introduction Basics Advanced table formatting Collapsing Conditional tables Sorting Using colours Links and diffs Links Interlanguage Interwiki Permanent Diffs Simplest diff guide Simple diff and link guide Complete diff and link guide Colon trick Link color Pipe trick URLs Media files: images, videos and sounds Media help Files Creation and usage Moving files to Commons Images Introduction to images Picture tutorial Preparing images for upload Uploading images Options to hide an image Extended image syntax SVG help Gallery tag Graphics tutorials Basic bitmap image editing How to improve image quality Graphics Lab resources Sound file markup Visual file markup Other graphics Family trees Graphs and charts How to create Barcharts To scale charts Math formulas Math symbols LaTeX symbols Rendering math Musical scores Musical symbols Timeline EasyTimeline syntax WikiHiero syntax Templates and Lua modules Templates Advanced template coding Template documentation Template index Template limits Template sandbox and test cases Citation templates Lua help Lua project Resources To do Substitution Purge Job queue Transclusion Labeled section Guide to Scribbling Data structure Namespaces Main/Article Category Draft File File description page Help Portal Project/Wikipedia Talk Archiving Simple Template User User page design MediaWiki Bug reports and feature requests System message TimedMediaHandler extension Module Special HTML and CSS Cascading Style Sheets HTML in wikitext Catalogue of CSS classes Common.js and common.css User CSS for monospaced coding font Classes in microformats Markup validation Span tags Useful styles Customisation and tools Preferences Gadgets Skins Citation tools Cleaning up vandalism tools Customizing watchlists Hide pages IRC Scripts User scripts Guide Techniques User style Tools Alternative browsing Browser tools Editing tools Navigation shortcuts Optimum tool set Wikimedia Cloud Services Beta Features at MediaWiki Automated editing AfC helper script AutoWikiBrowser Bots Creating HotCat Huggle Navigation popups RedWarn Twinkle WPCleaner Inactive igloo STiki See also: Category:Wikipedia how-to Category:Wikipedia information pages Further navigation at: Help pages Administrators Accessibility Accounts Bots Referencing Citation metadata Templates User scripts v t e Wikipedia referencing Policies and guidelines Verifiability No original research Biographies of living persons Reliable sources Medicine Citing sources Scientific citations General advice Citation needed Find sources Combining sources Offline sources Referencing styles Citing sources Citation Style 1 Citation Style 2 Citation Style Vancouver LSA Comics Citation templates Reflist template Inline citations Footnotes Punctuation and footnotes Shortened footnotes Nesting footnotes Help for beginners Reference-tags Citations quick reference Introduction to referencing Referencing with citation templates Referencing without using templates Referencing dos and don'ts Citing Wikipedia Advanced help Cite link labels Citation tools Cite errors Cite messages Converting between references formats Reference display customization References and page numbers Guidance on source reviewing at FAC Template documentation {{Edit refs}} {{Refref}} {{Refref2}} {{Refstart}} Tools Wikipedia Library Deprecated Parenthetical referencing v t e Wikipedia templates Main namespace General Cleanup Verifiability and sources Disputes Hatnotes Infoboxes Links External link templates Linking country articles Lists Main page Section Sources of articles Quick reference Standard boxes Stub types Translation Other namespaces Compact TOC Category File Talk Template User Userboxes User talk Wikipedia WikiProject banners All namespaces Deletion (Speedy) Formatting Maintenance Merging Moving Requested Navigation Redirect pages Functional index Language codes Splitting Wikimedia sister projects Navboxes with templates Archive Articles for deletion Birth, death and age Button Category header Citation and verifiability Citation Style 1 Deletion review Editnotice Hatnotes Help desk Inline cleanup Introduction cleanup IPA Math Notice and warnings Organization infoboxes Proposed article mergers Protection Quotation Redirects Search Semantics Speedy deletion Notices String-handling Sup and sub-related Top icon Transwiki maintenance Unicode User talk pages User noticeboard notices Userboxes User rights Userspace linking Userspace Disclaimers Wikibreak WikiLove Inline images Wikipedia icons Discussion icons Comment icons Emoji Related topics Template documentation Examples of templates Maintenance template removal Requested templates WikiProject Templates Template help Template namespace Search Category v t e Useful links Daily pages CAT:HELP WP:ANI WP:BLPN WP:BOTN WP:COIN WP:DASH WP:FTN WP:HD WP:MCQ WP:NORN WP:NPOVN WP:PUMP (/A /M /P /R /T) WP:RD (/C /E /H /L /M /MA /S) WP:RFC (/MEDIA /BIO /ECON /HIST /LANG /NAME /PAG /PHIL /POLY /SCI /SOC /STYLE) WP:RFF WP:RSN WP:SPI WP:THIRD WP:DRV) Things to do CAT:BACKLOG CAT:M CAT:WRI WP:ABUSE WP:AFC WP:ASOF WP:DPWL WP:FAC WP:FAR WP:FPC WP:GAN WP:GAR WP:KIND WP:MISSING WP:PR WP:RD WP:RP WP:SPOKEN WP:UW WP:THQ WP:VITAL WP:WANTED WP:WC BrokenRedirects Disambigs LongPages NewPages OrphanPages TagsPages UncatImages UncatPages Resources CAT:HOWTO WP:AWARD WP:CATEGORY WP:CAT-R WP:CITE WP:CITET WP:COPYEDIT WP:CUTPASTE WP:CUV WP:DEPT WP:DISAMBIG WP:EDIT WP:FOOT WP:FORMULA WP:HAT WP:ICT WP:LAYOUT WP:LIBRARY WP:MAGIC WP:MERGE WP:PIFU WP:PRECEDENT WP:REDIRECT WP:STYLE WP:SUMMARY WP:TEMPLATE CatTree PrefixIndex Policies / Guidelines WP:3RR WP:ADMIN WP:AP WP:APPEAL WP:ATTACK WP:AUTOBIO WP:BAN WP:BLANK WP:BLOCK WP:BOLD WP:BOTPOL WP:BUILD WP:CANVASS WP:CFORK WP:CIVIL WP:CONFLICT WP:CONSENSUS WP:COPYRIGHT WP:DELETE WP:DISCLAIM WP:DISPUTE WP:DISRUPTIVE WP:DONTBITE WP:DPR WP:EP WP:ETIQ WP:EDITWAR WP:FRINGE WP:GAME WP:GOOGLE WP:HARASS WP:HOAX WP:IGNORE WP:IUP WP:LEAD WP:LEGAL WP:LIBEL WP:LINKS WP:LIST WP:LIVING WP:LOGOS WP:M WP:NAME WP:NONFREE WP:NONSENSE WP:NOT WP:NOTE WP:NPOV WP:NPS WP:OFFICE WP:ORIGINAL WP:OVERSIGHT WP:OWN WP:PACL WP:PD WP:PEACOCK WP:PERFORM WP:POINT WP:POLLING WP:PROD WP:PROTECT WP:RELIABLE WP:SELF WP:SOCK WP:SPAM WP:SPEEDY WP:STUB WP:TALK WP:TP WP:TRIVIA WP:USERBOX WP:USERNAME WP:USERPAGE WP:VANDAL WP:VANISH WP:VERIFY WP:WEASEL WP:WHEEL Administrators CAT:AB CAT:CSD CAT:PER CAT:RFU WP:AE WP:AIV WP:AN WP:ANEW WP:ARL WP:CP WP:DGFA WP:NAS WP:OP WP:RFA WP:RFARB WP:RFM WP:RFPP WP:RM WP:RSPAM WP:UAA BlockLog DelLog ProtectLog External links Article statistics Edit Counter FIST ISBNdb Link checker Make Reference MissingTopics Is Admin? Wikichecker WikiEN-l archives Wiki ToDo v t e Wikipedia contents Types Overviews Outlines Lists Portals Glossaries Categories Indices Featured, good Featured articles Today's featured article Featured lists Featured pictures Featured topics Good articles Good topics Topics Current events Reference Culture Geography Health History Math Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Places, people, and times Academic disciplines Anniversaries today Countries and territories deaths this year Timelines decades, centuries, and millennia Indexes A–Z index Categories Dewey Decimal classes Library of Congress Classification Roget's Thesaurus Spoken articles Related Top pages Vital articles New pages Requested content Most-wanted Article cleanup backlog Directories v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Wikipedia Sorted by bestower By co-founder Jimmy Wales Order of the Day Wikimedian of the Year also by country By the Wikimedia Foundation Merchandise giveaways By the Wikipedia community WikiCup Editor of the Week W Award Four Award Triple Crown Million Award Barnstars on Wikipedia Ribbons Userboxes Awards by WikiProject    Awards by country    Barnstars 2.0 by country Other related awards  Personal user awards  Precious  Impact Autonomously Twenty Year Society Fifteen Year Society Ten Year Society Service awards Incremental service awards Administrative service awards See also Reward board Contests WikiLove Compliment before criticism Kindness Campaign Thanks! WikiProject Wikipedia Awards Wikipedia community portal Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Community_portal&oldid=1054375306" Categories: Wikipedia basic information Wikipedia discussion Wikipedia directories Wikipedia news Wikipedia noticeboards Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons MediaWiki Multilingual Wikisource Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ????? ??? Ænglisc ??????? Aragonés Armãneashti ??????? Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'? Az?rbaycanca Basa Bali ????? Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan ????????? ?????????? ?????????? (???????????) ??????? ????????? Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ??????? ?eština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Choctaw Cymraeg Dansk ??????? Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ?????????? ????? Ebon Eesti ???????? ?????? Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara ????? Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ???????? ?? ??????? ???/Hak-kâ-ngî ?????? ??? Hausa ?????? Hiri Motu Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiak IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ????? Jawa Kalaallisut ????? ??????? Kaszëbsczi ??????? Kernowek Ikinyarwanda ???? Kongo Kurdî Ladino ????? Latina Lëtzebuergesch ????? Lietuvi? Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Madhurâ ?????????? Malagasy ?????? M?ori ????? ???? ??? Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés ??????? ?????????? Dorerin Naoero Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies ????? ???? ??? Napulitano ??????? Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ?? Occitan ???? ????? ????? Oshiwambo Otsiherero Pälzisch Pangasinan ???? Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qafár af Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Român? Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? Sakizaya Sängö ??????? Sardu Scots Seeltersk Setswana Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? Tarandíne ???????/tatarça ????????? ??? ???? ?????? Tshivenda ???? Türkçe Türkmençe ???? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?????????? Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Ti?ng Vi?t Volapük ?? West-Vlams Winaray ?? Xitsonga ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 9 November 2021, at 17:38 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement