https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 18 November 2021 1.2 17 November 2021 1.3 16 November 2021 1.4 15 November 2021 1.5 14 November 2021 1.6 13 November 2021 1.7 12 November 2021 1.8 11 November 2021 1.9 10 November 2021 1.10 9 November 2021 1.11 8 November 2021 1.12 7 November 2021 1.13 6 November 2021 1.14 5 November 2021 1.15 4 November 2021 1.16 3 November 2021 1.17 2 November 2021 1.18 1 November 2021 Did you know... 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1055886679" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 18 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 18 November 2021 1.2 17 November 2021 1.3 16 November 2021 1.4 15 November 2021 1.5 14 November 2021 1.6 13 November 2021 1.7 12 November 2021 1.8 11 November 2021 1.9 10 November 2021 1.10 9 November 2021 1.11 8 November 2021 1.12 7 November 2021 1.13 6 November 2021 1.14 5 November 2021 1.15 4 November 2021 1.16 3 November 2021 1.17 2 November 2021 1.18 1 November 2021 Did you know... 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1055886679" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 18 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 20 November 2021 1.2 19 November 2021 1.3 18 November 2021 1.4 17 November 2021 1.5 16 November 2021 1.6 15 November 2021 1.7 14 November 2021 1.8 13 November 2021 1.9 12 November 2021 1.10 11 November 2021 1.11 10 November 2021 1.12 9 November 2021 1.13 8 November 2021 1.14 7 November 2021 1.15 6 November 2021 1.16 5 November 2021 1.17 4 November 2021 1.18 3 November 2021 1.19 2 November 2021 1.20 1 November 2021 Did you know... 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056209276" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 20 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 20 November 2021 1.2 19 November 2021 1.3 18 November 2021 1.4 17 November 2021 1.5 16 November 2021 1.6 15 November 2021 1.7 14 November 2021 1.8 13 November 2021 1.9 12 November 2021 1.10 11 November 2021 1.11 10 November 2021 1.12 9 November 2021 1.13 8 November 2021 1.14 7 November 2021 1.15 6 November 2021 1.16 5 November 2021 1.17 4 November 2021 1.18 3 November 2021 1.19 2 November 2021 1.20 1 November 2021 Did you know... 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056209276" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 20 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 21 November 2021 1.2 20 November 2021 1.3 19 November 2021 1.4 18 November 2021 1.5 17 November 2021 1.6 16 November 2021 1.7 15 November 2021 1.8 14 November 2021 1.9 13 November 2021 1.10 12 November 2021 1.11 11 November 2021 1.12 10 November 2021 1.13 9 November 2021 1.14 8 November 2021 1.15 7 November 2021 1.16 6 November 2021 1.17 5 November 2021 1.18 4 November 2021 1.19 3 November 2021 1.20 2 November 2021 1.21 1 November 2021 Did you know... 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056375253" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 21 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 21 November 2021 1.2 20 November 2021 1.3 19 November 2021 1.4 18 November 2021 1.5 17 November 2021 1.6 16 November 2021 1.7 15 November 2021 1.8 14 November 2021 1.9 13 November 2021 1.10 12 November 2021 1.11 11 November 2021 1.12 10 November 2021 1.13 9 November 2021 1.14 8 November 2021 1.15 7 November 2021 1.16 6 November 2021 1.17 5 November 2021 1.18 4 November 2021 1.19 3 November 2021 1.20 2 November 2021 1.21 1 November 2021 Did you know... 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056375253" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 21 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 23 November 2021 1.2 22 November 2021 1.3 21 November 2021 1.4 20 November 2021 1.5 19 November 2021 1.6 18 November 2021 1.7 17 November 2021 1.8 16 November 2021 1.9 15 November 2021 1.10 14 November 2021 1.11 13 November 2021 1.12 12 November 2021 1.13 11 November 2021 1.14 10 November 2021 1.15 9 November 2021 1.16 8 November 2021 1.17 7 November 2021 1.18 6 November 2021 1.19 5 November 2021 1.20 4 November 2021 1.21 3 November 2021 1.22 2 November 2021 1.23 1 November 2021 Did you know... 23 November 2021 12:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Portrait of Barbara Stanwyck by Whitey Schafer ... that photographer Whitey Schafer (portrait of Barbara Stanwyck pictured) thought canned sex was better than cold cream? ... that Earth 300 has designed a climate research vessel that would include a molten salt reactor and a quantum computer? ... that the NBA 75 includes the only league MVP who was not among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History? ... that Hunuki Hunukitama traveled to Baltimore to negotiate the establishment of a Korean holy city in Niue? ... that the audience screamed when Ethel Merman first sang "Sam and Delilah"? ... that the starfish Luidia maculata eats its prey whole, and often leaves behind inedible fragments in the hollow in which it was lying? ... that climatologist Geert Jan van Oldenborgh's work was instrumental in proving that the 2021 European floods were made more likely by climate change? ... that Carol Publishing Group distributed a suicide manual? 00:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Lyndon B. Johnson taking the oath of office aboard Air Force One ... that Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) delivered the "Let Us Continue" address five days after assuming the presidency upon the assassination of John F. Kennedy? ... that pushbacks of migrants in the Aegean Sea have been described as "a human rights violation that encapsulates a will to eliminate a person's presence on the face of the planet"? ... that when Oregon journalist Larry Smyth was asked who he thought would win presidential elections, he invariably replied "the man who gets the most votes"? ... that the Central Khalsa Orphanage houses the first Guru Granth Sahib in braille? ... that Montana television station KOPR-TV brought forward its start date by several months, only to last just one year? ... that Esther Ze Naw, who appeared on the 2021 Time 100, was one of the few people in Myanmar who protested against Aung San Suu Kyi's defence of the military at the International Court of Justice in December 2019? ... that Capitalism in America was shortlisted for the 2018 Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award? ... that Kitty Ponse successfully changed the sex of toads? 22 November 2021 12:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Play media Money Musk ... that Thomas Jefferson and Henry Ford both took an interest in the folk tune and contra dance "Money Musk" (example pictured)? ... that the classic board game Jacquet was the benchmark for all tables games in France during the 19th century? ... that Charles Larson became one of the first Americans to teach African literature, after working in Nigeria for the Peace Corps to avoid the Vietnam draft? ... that the Filipino fraternity Alpha Phi Beta has been involved in instances of violence, including getting mauled by rival fraternities, such as Sigma Rho? ... that after he died in September 2021, John Boyden was revealed to have written under the pseudonym "Lunchtime O'Boulez"? ... that a short version of the Japanese stop motion film Junk Head was favorably reviewed by director Guillermo del Toro? ... that the sea slug Philinopsis depicta has no radula or jaws, and is thought to protrude its foregut and suck up its prey whole? ... that according to American sociologist Pauline Bart, "everything is data, but data isn't everything"? 00:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) A page of Mutinensis gr. 122 ... that Mutinensis gr. 122 (page pictured) is the only surviving manuscript to include portraits of all Byzantine emperors? ... that Nicholas Hasselbach introduced the first printing press to colonial Maryland in 1765? ... that the Commission on Elections was allowed to tabulate the results of the 2002 Puerto Princesa mayoral recall election but could not declare a winner right away? ... that Herb Plambeck was the founder of the National Plowing Match in Dexter, Iowa? ... that Cimbrian seeresses are said to have predicted the future by slitting the throats of war prisoners and studying how the blood trickled down into a cauldron? ... that the tributary Walnut Creek in Iowa was named for the black walnut trees which once lined the creek before early settlers cleared them? ... that Friedrich Hefty could not become an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Aviation Troops because of his interest in aviation? ... that the developer of Art Sqool did not attend art school? 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056765862" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 23 November 2021 1.2 22 November 2021 1.3 21 November 2021 1.4 20 November 2021 1.5 19 November 2021 1.6 18 November 2021 1.7 17 November 2021 1.8 16 November 2021 1.9 15 November 2021 1.10 14 November 2021 1.11 13 November 2021 1.12 12 November 2021 1.13 11 November 2021 1.14 10 November 2021 1.15 9 November 2021 1.16 8 November 2021 1.17 7 November 2021 1.18 6 November 2021 1.19 5 November 2021 1.20 4 November 2021 1.21 3 November 2021 1.22 2 November 2021 1.23 1 November 2021 Did you know... 23 November 2021 12:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Portrait of Barbara Stanwyck by Whitey Schafer ... that photographer Whitey Schafer (portrait of Barbara Stanwyck pictured) thought canned sex was better than cold cream? ... that Earth 300 has designed a climate research vessel that would include a molten salt reactor and a quantum computer? ... that the NBA 75 includes the only league MVP who was not among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History? ... that Hunuki Hunukitama traveled to Baltimore to negotiate the establishment of a Korean holy city in Niue? ... that the audience screamed when Ethel Merman first sang "Sam and Delilah"? ... that the starfish Luidia maculata eats its prey whole, and often leaves behind inedible fragments in the hollow in which it was lying? ... that climatologist Geert Jan van Oldenborgh's work was instrumental in proving that the 2021 European floods were made more likely by climate change? ... that Carol Publishing Group distributed a suicide manual? 00:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Lyndon B. Johnson taking the oath of office aboard Air Force One ... that Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) delivered the "Let Us Continue" address five days after assuming the presidency upon the assassination of John F. Kennedy? ... that pushbacks of migrants in the Aegean Sea have been described as "a human rights violation that encapsulates a will to eliminate a person's presence on the face of the planet"? ... that when Oregon journalist Larry Smyth was asked who he thought would win presidential elections, he invariably replied "the man who gets the most votes"? ... that the Central Khalsa Orphanage houses the first Guru Granth Sahib in braille? ... that Montana television station KOPR-TV brought forward its start date by several months, only to last just one year? ... that Esther Ze Naw, who appeared on the 2021 Time 100, was one of the few people in Myanmar who protested against Aung San Suu Kyi's defence of the military at the International Court of Justice in December 2019? ... that Capitalism in America was shortlisted for the 2018 Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award? ... that Kitty Ponse successfully changed the sex of toads? 22 November 2021 12:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Play media Money Musk ... that Thomas Jefferson and Henry Ford both took an interest in the folk tune and contra dance "Money Musk" (example pictured)? ... that the classic board game Jacquet was the benchmark for all tables games in France during the 19th century? ... that Charles Larson became one of the first Americans to teach African literature, after working in Nigeria for the Peace Corps to avoid the Vietnam draft? ... that the Filipino fraternity Alpha Phi Beta has been involved in instances of violence, including getting mauled by rival fraternities, such as Sigma Rho? ... that after he died in September 2021, John Boyden was revealed to have written under the pseudonym "Lunchtime O'Boulez"? ... that a short version of the Japanese stop motion film Junk Head was favorably reviewed by director Guillermo del Toro? ... that the sea slug Philinopsis depicta has no radula or jaws, and is thought to protrude its foregut and suck up its prey whole? ... that according to American sociologist Pauline Bart, "everything is data, but data isn't everything"? 00:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) A page of Mutinensis gr. 122 ... that Mutinensis gr. 122 (page pictured) is the only surviving manuscript to include portraits of all Byzantine emperors? ... that Nicholas Hasselbach introduced the first printing press to colonial Maryland in 1765? ... that the Commission on Elections was allowed to tabulate the results of the 2002 Puerto Princesa mayoral recall election but could not declare a winner right away? ... that Herb Plambeck was the founder of the National Plowing Match in Dexter, Iowa? ... that Cimbrian seeresses are said to have predicted the future by slitting the throats of war prisoners and studying how the blood trickled down into a cauldron? ... that the tributary Walnut Creek in Iowa was named for the black walnut trees which once lined the creek before early settlers cleared them? ... that Friedrich Hefty could not become an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Aviation Troops because of his interest in aviation? ... that the developer of Art Sqool did not attend art school? 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056765862" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 24 November 2021 1.2 23 November 2021 1.3 22 November 2021 1.4 21 November 2021 1.5 20 November 2021 1.6 19 November 2021 1.7 18 November 2021 1.8 17 November 2021 1.9 16 November 2021 1.10 15 November 2021 1.11 14 November 2021 1.12 13 November 2021 1.13 12 November 2021 1.14 11 November 2021 1.15 10 November 2021 1.16 9 November 2021 1.17 8 November 2021 1.18 7 November 2021 1.19 6 November 2021 1.20 5 November 2021 1.21 4 November 2021 1.22 3 November 2021 1.23 2 November 2021 1.24 1 November 2021 Did you know... 24 November 2021 12:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Victor 3900 ... that the Victor 3900 (example pictured) was the first electronic calculator using custom integrated circuits, allowing it to be "smaller than a typewriter"? ... that after being selected at the age of five for a role in the film Soldier Boy, Andrey Andreev memorized the entire 100-page script? ... that the 1959 Texas A&I Javelinas football team won the first of the school's seven NAIA Football National Championships? ... that Thomas Guggeis, who studied conducting and quantum mechanics, began at the Berlin State Opera as an assistant of Daniel Barenboim and became the youngest Staatskapellmeister there? ... that the title of the My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic episode "Filli Vanilli" references the lip-syncing scandal of the German-French R&B duo Milli Vanilli? ... that Aline Rocha, the first Brazilian woman to compete at the Winter Paralympic Games, also came third in the women's wheelchair race at the 2021 Berlin Marathon? ... that according to Human Rights Watch, U.S. maximum pressure against Iran has seriously threatened Iranians' right to health and access to essential medicines including those of cancer patients? ... that John Shakespeare wanted to impale his wife's family on his coat of arms? 00:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) PrOP-M on top of the Mars 3 lander ... that the Soviet rover PrOP-M (pictured) was intended to be the first rover on Mars in 1971, 26 years earlier than NASA's Sojourner? ... that Ryan Grubb was on the football coaching staff at South Dakota State University while pursuing a master's degree in sports pedagogy? ... that Squaring the Circle is Sneaker Pimps' first album in almost 20 years? ... that George Balanchine choreographed his ballet Scherzo à la Russe for the New York City Ballet's Stravinsky Festival, a tribute to the composer after his death? ... that Cédric Wermuth, the co-president of the Swiss Social Democrats, was once fined for squatting? ... that all charges against John S. Marmaduke for killing a fellow Confederate general in a duel were later dropped? ... that Jean Pierson, the former CEO of Airbus, once unbuckled his belt and dropped his trousers when pressed for a hard bargain while selling commercial jets? ... that a reviewer thought that the two-part "Friendship Is Magic" "[flies] off the rails in an orgy of oddly Spielbergian effects and philosophizing" during its climax? 23 November 2021 12:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Portrait of Barbara Stanwyck by Whitey Schafer ... that photographer Whitey Schafer (portrait of Barbara Stanwyck pictured) thought canned sex was better than cold cream? ... that Earth 300 has designed a climate research vessel that would include a molten salt reactor and a quantum computer? ... that the NBA 75 includes the only league MVP who was not among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History? ... that Hunuki Hunukitama traveled to Baltimore to negotiate the establishment of a Korean holy city in Niue? ... that the audience screamed when Ethel Merman first sang "Sam and Delilah"? ... that the starfish Luidia maculata eats its prey whole, and often leaves behind inedible fragments in the hollow in which it was lying? ... that climatologist Geert Jan van Oldenborgh's work was instrumental in proving that the 2021 European floods were made more likely by climate change? ... that Carol Publishing Group distributed a suicide manual? 00:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Lyndon B. Johnson taking the oath of office aboard Air Force One ... that Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) delivered the "Let Us Continue" address five days after assuming the presidency upon the assassination of John F. Kennedy? ... that pushbacks of migrants in the Aegean Sea have been described as "a human rights violation that encapsulates a will to eliminate a person's presence on the face of the planet"? ... that when Oregon journalist Larry Smyth was asked who he thought would win presidential elections, he invariably replied "the man who gets the most votes"? ... that the Central Khalsa Orphanage houses the first Guru Granth Sahib in braille? ... that Montana television station KOPR-TV brought forward its start date by several months, only to last just one year? ... that Esther Ze Naw, who appeared on the 2021 Time 100, was one of the few people in Myanmar who protested against Aung San Suu Kyi's defence of the military at the International Court of Justice in December 2019? ... that Capitalism in America was shortlisted for the 2018 Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award? ... that Kitty Ponse successfully changed the sex of toads? 22 November 2021 12:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Play media Money Musk ... that Thomas Jefferson and Henry Ford both took an interest in the folk tune and contra dance "Money Musk" (example pictured)? ... that the classic board game Jacquet was the benchmark for all tables games in France during the 19th century? ... that Charles Larson became one of the first Americans to teach African literature, after working in Nigeria for the Peace Corps to avoid the Vietnam draft? ... that the Filipino fraternity Alpha Phi Beta has been involved in instances of violence, including getting mauled by rival fraternities, such as Sigma Rho? ... that after he died in September 2021, John Boyden was revealed to have written under the pseudonym "Lunchtime O'Boulez"? ... that a short version of the Japanese stop motion film Junk Head was favorably reviewed by director Guillermo del Toro? ... that the sea slug Philinopsis depicta has no radula or jaws, and is thought to protrude its foregut and suck up its prey whole? ... that according to American sociologist Pauline Bart, "everything is data, but data isn't everything"? 00:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) A page of Mutinensis gr. 122 ... that Mutinensis gr. 122 (page pictured) is the only surviving manuscript to include portraits of all Byzantine emperors? ... that Nicholas Hasselbach introduced the first printing press to colonial Maryland in 1765? ... that the Commission on Elections was allowed to tabulate the results of the 2002 Puerto Princesa mayoral recall election but could not declare a winner right away? ... that Herb Plambeck was the founder of the National Plowing Match in Dexter, Iowa? ... that Cimbrian seeresses are said to have predicted the future by slitting the throats of war prisoners and studying how the blood trickled down into a cauldron? ... that the tributary Walnut Creek in Iowa was named for the black walnut trees which once lined the creek before early settlers cleared them? ... that Friedrich Hefty could not become an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Aviation Troops because of his interest in aviation? ... that the developer of Art Sqool did not attend art school? 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056932463" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 24 November 2021 1.2 23 November 2021 1.3 22 November 2021 1.4 21 November 2021 1.5 20 November 2021 1.6 19 November 2021 1.7 18 November 2021 1.8 17 November 2021 1.9 16 November 2021 1.10 15 November 2021 1.11 14 November 2021 1.12 13 November 2021 1.13 12 November 2021 1.14 11 November 2021 1.15 10 November 2021 1.16 9 November 2021 1.17 8 November 2021 1.18 7 November 2021 1.19 6 November 2021 1.20 5 November 2021 1.21 4 November 2021 1.22 3 November 2021 1.23 2 November 2021 1.24 1 November 2021 Did you know... 24 November 2021 12:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Victor 3900 ... that the Victor 3900 (example pictured) was the first electronic calculator using custom integrated circuits, allowing it to be "smaller than a typewriter"? ... that after being selected at the age of five for a role in the film Soldier Boy, Andrey Andreev memorized the entire 100-page script? ... that the 1959 Texas A&I Javelinas football team won the first of the school's seven NAIA Football National Championships? ... that Thomas Guggeis, who studied conducting and quantum mechanics, began at the Berlin State Opera as an assistant of Daniel Barenboim and became the youngest Staatskapellmeister there? ... that the title of the My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic episode "Filli Vanilli" references the lip-syncing scandal of the German-French R&B duo Milli Vanilli? ... that Aline Rocha, the first Brazilian woman to compete at the Winter Paralympic Games, also came third in the women's wheelchair race at the 2021 Berlin Marathon? ... that according to Human Rights Watch, U.S. maximum pressure against Iran has seriously threatened Iranians' right to health and access to essential medicines including those of cancer patients? ... that John Shakespeare wanted to impale his wife's family on his coat of arms? 00:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) PrOP-M on top of the Mars 3 lander ... that the Soviet rover PrOP-M (pictured) was intended to be the first rover on Mars in 1971, 26 years earlier than NASA's Sojourner? ... that Ryan Grubb was on the football coaching staff at South Dakota State University while pursuing a master's degree in sports pedagogy? ... that Squaring the Circle is Sneaker Pimps' first album in almost 20 years? ... that George Balanchine choreographed his ballet Scherzo à la Russe for the New York City Ballet's Stravinsky Festival, a tribute to the composer after his death? ... that Cédric Wermuth, the co-president of the Swiss Social Democrats, was once fined for squatting? ... that all charges against John S. Marmaduke for killing a fellow Confederate general in a duel were later dropped? ... that Jean Pierson, the former CEO of Airbus, once unbuckled his belt and dropped his trousers when pressed for a hard bargain while selling commercial jets? ... that a reviewer thought that the two-part "Friendship Is Magic" "[flies] off the rails in an orgy of oddly Spielbergian effects and philosophizing" during its climax? 23 November 2021 12:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Portrait of Barbara Stanwyck by Whitey Schafer ... that photographer Whitey Schafer (portrait of Barbara Stanwyck pictured) thought canned sex was better than cold cream? ... that Earth 300 has designed a climate research vessel that would include a molten salt reactor and a quantum computer? ... that the NBA 75 includes the only league MVP who was not among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History? ... that Hunuki Hunukitama traveled to Baltimore to negotiate the establishment of a Korean holy city in Niue? ... that the audience screamed when Ethel Merman first sang "Sam and Delilah"? ... that the starfish Luidia maculata eats its prey whole, and often leaves behind inedible fragments in the hollow in which it was lying? ... that climatologist Geert Jan van Oldenborgh's work was instrumental in proving that the 2021 European floods were made more likely by climate change? ... that Carol Publishing Group distributed a suicide manual? 00:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Lyndon B. Johnson taking the oath of office aboard Air Force One ... that Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) delivered the "Let Us Continue" address five days after assuming the presidency upon the assassination of John F. Kennedy? ... that pushbacks of migrants in the Aegean Sea have been described as "a human rights violation that encapsulates a will to eliminate a person's presence on the face of the planet"? ... that when Oregon journalist Larry Smyth was asked who he thought would win presidential elections, he invariably replied "the man who gets the most votes"? ... that the Central Khalsa Orphanage houses the first Guru Granth Sahib in braille? ... that Montana television station KOPR-TV brought forward its start date by several months, only to last just one year? ... that Esther Ze Naw, who appeared on the 2021 Time 100, was one of the few people in Myanmar who protested against Aung San Suu Kyi's defence of the military at the International Court of Justice in December 2019? ... that Capitalism in America was shortlisted for the 2018 Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award? ... that Kitty Ponse successfully changed the sex of toads? 22 November 2021 12:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Play media Money Musk ... that Thomas Jefferson and Henry Ford both took an interest in the folk tune and contra dance "Money Musk" (example pictured)? ... that the classic board game Jacquet was the benchmark for all tables games in France during the 19th century? ... that Charles Larson became one of the first Americans to teach African literature, after working in Nigeria for the Peace Corps to avoid the Vietnam draft? ... that the Filipino fraternity Alpha Phi Beta has been involved in instances of violence, including getting mauled by rival fraternities, such as Sigma Rho? ... that after he died in September 2021, John Boyden was revealed to have written under the pseudonym "Lunchtime O'Boulez"? ... that a short version of the Japanese stop motion film Junk Head was favorably reviewed by director Guillermo del Toro? ... that the sea slug Philinopsis depicta has no radula or jaws, and is thought to protrude its foregut and suck up its prey whole? ... that according to American sociologist Pauline Bart, "everything is data, but data isn't everything"? 00:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) A page of Mutinensis gr. 122 ... that Mutinensis gr. 122 (page pictured) is the only surviving manuscript to include portraits of all Byzantine emperors? ... that Nicholas Hasselbach introduced the first printing press to colonial Maryland in 1765? ... that the Commission on Elections was allowed to tabulate the results of the 2002 Puerto Princesa mayoral recall election but could not declare a winner right away? ... that Herb Plambeck was the founder of the National Plowing Match in Dexter, Iowa? ... that Cimbrian seeresses are said to have predicted the future by slitting the throats of war prisoners and studying how the blood trickled down into a cauldron? ... that the tributary Walnut Creek in Iowa was named for the black walnut trees which once lined the creek before early settlers cleared them? ... that Friedrich Hefty could not become an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Aviation Troops because of his interest in aviation? ... that the developer of Art Sqool did not attend art school? 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056932463" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 24 November 2021 1.2 23 November 2021 1.3 22 November 2021 1.4 21 November 2021 1.5 20 November 2021 1.6 19 November 2021 1.7 18 November 2021 1.8 17 November 2021 1.9 16 November 2021 1.10 15 November 2021 1.11 14 November 2021 1.12 13 November 2021 1.13 12 November 2021 1.14 11 November 2021 1.15 10 November 2021 1.16 9 November 2021 1.17 8 November 2021 1.18 7 November 2021 1.19 6 November 2021 1.20 5 November 2021 1.21 4 November 2021 1.22 3 November 2021 1.23 2 November 2021 1.24 1 November 2021 Did you know... 24 November 2021 12:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Victor 3900 ... that the Victor 3900 (example pictured) was the first electronic calculator using custom integrated circuits, allowing it to be "smaller than a typewriter"? ... that after being selected at the age of five for a role in the film Soldier Boy, Andrey Andreev memorized the entire 100-page script? ... that the 1959 Texas A&I Javelinas football team won the first of the school's seven NAIA Football National Championships? ... that Thomas Guggeis, who studied conducting and quantum mechanics, began at the Berlin State Opera as an assistant of Daniel Barenboim and became the youngest Staatskapellmeister there? ... that the title of the My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic episode "Filli Vanilli" references the lip-syncing scandal of the German-French R&B duo Milli Vanilli? ... that Aline Rocha, the first Brazilian woman to compete at the Winter Paralympic Games, also came third in the women's wheelchair race at the 2021 Berlin Marathon? ... that according to Human Rights Watch, U.S. maximum pressure against Iran has seriously threatened Iranians' right to health and access to essential medicines including those of cancer patients? ... that John Shakespeare wanted to impale his wife's family on his coat of arms? 00:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) PrOP-M on top of the Mars 3 lander ... that the Soviet rover PrOP-M (pictured) was intended to be the first rover on Mars in 1971, 26 years earlier than NASA's Sojourner? ... that Ryan Grubb was on the football coaching staff at South Dakota State University while pursuing a master's degree in sports pedagogy? ... that Squaring the Circle is Sneaker Pimps' first album in almost 20 years? ... that George Balanchine choreographed his ballet Scherzo à la Russe for the New York City Ballet's Stravinsky Festival, a tribute to the composer after his death? ... that Cédric Wermuth, the co-president of the Swiss Social Democrats, was once fined for squatting? ... that all charges against John S. Marmaduke for killing a fellow Confederate general in a duel were later dropped? ... that Jean Pierson, the former CEO of Airbus, once unbuckled his belt and dropped his trousers when pressed for a hard bargain while selling commercial jets? ... that a reviewer thought that the two-part "Friendship Is Magic" "[flies] off the rails in an orgy of oddly Spielbergian effects and philosophizing" during its climax? 23 November 2021 12:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Portrait of Barbara Stanwyck by Whitey Schafer ... that photographer Whitey Schafer (portrait of Barbara Stanwyck pictured) thought canned sex was better than cold cream? ... that Earth 300 has designed a climate research vessel that would include a molten salt reactor and a quantum computer? ... that the NBA 75 includes the only league MVP who was not among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History? ... that Hunuki Hunukitama traveled to Baltimore to negotiate the establishment of a Korean holy city in Niue? ... that the audience screamed when Ethel Merman first sang "Sam and Delilah"? ... that the starfish Luidia maculata eats its prey whole, and often leaves behind inedible fragments in the hollow in which it was lying? ... that climatologist Geert Jan van Oldenborgh's work was instrumental in proving that the 2021 European floods were made more likely by climate change? ... that Carol Publishing Group distributed a suicide manual? 00:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Lyndon B. Johnson taking the oath of office aboard Air Force One ... that Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) delivered the "Let Us Continue" address five days after assuming the presidency upon the assassination of John F. Kennedy? ... that pushbacks of migrants in the Aegean Sea have been described as "a human rights violation that encapsulates a will to eliminate a person's presence on the face of the planet"? ... that when Oregon journalist Larry Smyth was asked who he thought would win presidential elections, he invariably replied "the man who gets the most votes"? ... that the Central Khalsa Orphanage houses the first Guru Granth Sahib in braille? ... that Montana television station KOPR-TV brought forward its start date by several months, only to last just one year? ... that Esther Ze Naw, who appeared on the 2021 Time 100, was one of the few people in Myanmar who protested against Aung San Suu Kyi's defence of the military at the International Court of Justice in December 2019? ... that Capitalism in America was shortlisted for the 2018 Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award? ... that Kitty Ponse successfully changed the sex of toads? 22 November 2021 12:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Play media Money Musk ... that Thomas Jefferson and Henry Ford both took an interest in the folk tune and contra dance "Money Musk" (example pictured)? ... that the classic board game Jacquet was the benchmark for all tables games in France during the 19th century? ... that Charles Larson became one of the first Americans to teach African literature, after working in Nigeria for the Peace Corps to avoid the Vietnam draft? ... that the Filipino fraternity Alpha Phi Beta has been involved in instances of violence, including getting mauled by rival fraternities, such as Sigma Rho? ... that after he died in September 2021, John Boyden was revealed to have written under the pseudonym "Lunchtime O'Boulez"? ... that a short version of the Japanese stop motion film Junk Head was favorably reviewed by director Guillermo del Toro? ... that the sea slug Philinopsis depicta has no radula or jaws, and is thought to protrude its foregut and suck up its prey whole? ... that according to American sociologist Pauline Bart, "everything is data, but data isn't everything"? 00:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) A page of Mutinensis gr. 122 ... that Mutinensis gr. 122 (page pictured) is the only surviving manuscript to include portraits of all Byzantine emperors? ... that Nicholas Hasselbach introduced the first printing press to colonial Maryland in 1765? ... that the Commission on Elections was allowed to tabulate the results of the 2002 Puerto Princesa mayoral recall election but could not declare a winner right away? ... that Herb Plambeck was the founder of the National Plowing Match in Dexter, Iowa? ... that Cimbrian seeresses are said to have predicted the future by slitting the throats of war prisoners and studying how the blood trickled down into a cauldron? ... that the tributary Walnut Creek in Iowa was named for the black walnut trees which once lined the creek before early settlers cleared them? ... that Friedrich Hefty could not become an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Aviation Troops because of his interest in aviation? ... that the developer of Art Sqool did not attend art school? 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056932463" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 24 November 2021 1.2 23 November 2021 1.3 22 November 2021 1.4 21 November 2021 1.5 20 November 2021 1.6 19 November 2021 1.7 18 November 2021 1.8 17 November 2021 1.9 16 November 2021 1.10 15 November 2021 1.11 14 November 2021 1.12 13 November 2021 1.13 12 November 2021 1.14 11 November 2021 1.15 10 November 2021 1.16 9 November 2021 1.17 8 November 2021 1.18 7 November 2021 1.19 6 November 2021 1.20 5 November 2021 1.21 4 November 2021 1.22 3 November 2021 1.23 2 November 2021 1.24 1 November 2021 Did you know... 24 November 2021 12:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Victor 3900 ... that the Victor 3900 (example pictured) was the first electronic calculator using custom integrated circuits, allowing it to be "smaller than a typewriter"? ... that after being selected at the age of five for a role in the film Soldier Boy, Andrey Andreev memorized the entire 100-page script? ... that the 1959 Texas A&I Javelinas football team won the first of the school's seven NAIA Football National Championships? ... that Thomas Guggeis, who studied conducting and quantum mechanics, began at the Berlin State Opera as an assistant of Daniel Barenboim and became the youngest Staatskapellmeister there? ... that the title of the My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic episode "Filli Vanilli" references the lip-syncing scandal of the German-French R&B duo Milli Vanilli? ... that Aline Rocha, the first Brazilian woman to compete at the Winter Paralympic Games, also came third in the women's wheelchair race at the 2021 Berlin Marathon? ... that according to Human Rights Watch, U.S. maximum pressure against Iran has seriously threatened Iranians' right to health and access to essential medicines including those of cancer patients? ... that John Shakespeare wanted to impale his wife's family on his coat of arms? 00:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) PrOP-M on top of the Mars 3 lander ... that the Soviet rover PrOP-M (pictured) was intended to be the first rover on Mars in 1971, 26 years earlier than NASA's Sojourner? ... that Ryan Grubb was on the football coaching staff at South Dakota State University while pursuing a master's degree in sports pedagogy? ... that Squaring the Circle is Sneaker Pimps' first album in almost 20 years? ... that George Balanchine choreographed his ballet Scherzo à la Russe for the New York City Ballet's Stravinsky Festival, a tribute to the composer after his death? ... that Cédric Wermuth, the co-president of the Swiss Social Democrats, was once fined for squatting? ... that all charges against John S. Marmaduke for killing a fellow Confederate general in a duel were later dropped? ... that Jean Pierson, the former CEO of Airbus, once unbuckled his belt and dropped his trousers when pressed for a hard bargain while selling commercial jets? ... that a reviewer thought that the two-part "Friendship Is Magic" "[flies] off the rails in an orgy of oddly Spielbergian effects and philosophizing" during its climax? 23 November 2021 12:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Portrait of Barbara Stanwyck by Whitey Schafer ... that photographer Whitey Schafer (portrait of Barbara Stanwyck pictured) thought canned sex was better than cold cream? ... that Earth 300 has designed a climate research vessel that would include a molten salt reactor and a quantum computer? ... that the NBA 75 includes the only league MVP who was not among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History? ... that Hunuki Hunukitama traveled to Baltimore to negotiate the establishment of a Korean holy city in Niue? ... that the audience screamed when Ethel Merman first sang "Sam and Delilah"? ... that the starfish Luidia maculata eats its prey whole, and often leaves behind inedible fragments in the hollow in which it was lying? ... that climatologist Geert Jan van Oldenborgh's work was instrumental in proving that the 2021 European floods were made more likely by climate change? ... that Carol Publishing Group distributed a suicide manual? 00:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Lyndon B. Johnson taking the oath of office aboard Air Force One ... that Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) delivered the "Let Us Continue" address five days after assuming the presidency upon the assassination of John F. Kennedy? ... that pushbacks of migrants in the Aegean Sea have been described as "a human rights violation that encapsulates a will to eliminate a person's presence on the face of the planet"? ... that when Oregon journalist Larry Smyth was asked who he thought would win presidential elections, he invariably replied "the man who gets the most votes"? ... that the Central Khalsa Orphanage houses the first Guru Granth Sahib in braille? ... that Montana television station KOPR-TV brought forward its start date by several months, only to last just one year? ... that Esther Ze Naw, who appeared on the 2021 Time 100, was one of the few people in Myanmar who protested against Aung San Suu Kyi's defence of the military at the International Court of Justice in December 2019? ... that Capitalism in America was shortlisted for the 2018 Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award? ... that Kitty Ponse successfully changed the sex of toads? 22 November 2021 12:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Play media Money Musk ... that Thomas Jefferson and Henry Ford both took an interest in the folk tune and contra dance "Money Musk" (example pictured)? ... that the classic board game Jacquet was the benchmark for all tables games in France during the 19th century? ... that Charles Larson became one of the first Americans to teach African literature, after working in Nigeria for the Peace Corps to avoid the Vietnam draft? ... that the Filipino fraternity Alpha Phi Beta has been involved in instances of violence, including getting mauled by rival fraternities, such as Sigma Rho? ... that after he died in September 2021, John Boyden was revealed to have written under the pseudonym "Lunchtime O'Boulez"? ... that a short version of the Japanese stop motion film Junk Head was favorably reviewed by director Guillermo del Toro? ... that the sea slug Philinopsis depicta has no radula or jaws, and is thought to protrude its foregut and suck up its prey whole? ... that according to American sociologist Pauline Bart, "everything is data, but data isn't everything"? 00:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) A page of Mutinensis gr. 122 ... that Mutinensis gr. 122 (page pictured) is the only surviving manuscript to include portraits of all Byzantine emperors? ... that Nicholas Hasselbach introduced the first printing press to colonial Maryland in 1765? ... that the Commission on Elections was allowed to tabulate the results of the 2002 Puerto Princesa mayoral recall election but could not declare a winner right away? ... that Herb Plambeck was the founder of the National Plowing Match in Dexter, Iowa? ... that Cimbrian seeresses are said to have predicted the future by slitting the throats of war prisoners and studying how the blood trickled down into a cauldron? ... that the tributary Walnut Creek in Iowa was named for the black walnut trees which once lined the creek before early settlers cleared them? ... that Friedrich Hefty could not become an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Aviation Troops because of his interest in aviation? ... that the developer of Art Sqool did not attend art school? 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056932463" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 24 November 2021 1.2 23 November 2021 1.3 22 November 2021 1.4 21 November 2021 1.5 20 November 2021 1.6 19 November 2021 1.7 18 November 2021 1.8 17 November 2021 1.9 16 November 2021 1.10 15 November 2021 1.11 14 November 2021 1.12 13 November 2021 1.13 12 November 2021 1.14 11 November 2021 1.15 10 November 2021 1.16 9 November 2021 1.17 8 November 2021 1.18 7 November 2021 1.19 6 November 2021 1.20 5 November 2021 1.21 4 November 2021 1.22 3 November 2021 1.23 2 November 2021 1.24 1 November 2021 Did you know... 24 November 2021 12:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Victor 3900 ... that the Victor 3900 (example pictured) was the first electronic calculator using custom integrated circuits, allowing it to be "smaller than a typewriter"? ... that after being selected at the age of five for a role in the film Soldier Boy, Andrey Andreev memorized the entire 100-page script? ... that the 1959 Texas A&I Javelinas football team won the first of the school's seven NAIA Football National Championships? ... that Thomas Guggeis, who studied conducting and quantum mechanics, began at the Berlin State Opera as an assistant of Daniel Barenboim and became the youngest Staatskapellmeister there? ... that the title of the My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic episode "Filli Vanilli" references the lip-syncing scandal of the German-French R&B duo Milli Vanilli? ... that Aline Rocha, the first Brazilian woman to compete at the Winter Paralympic Games, also came third in the women's wheelchair race at the 2021 Berlin Marathon? ... that according to Human Rights Watch, U.S. maximum pressure against Iran has seriously threatened Iranians' right to health and access to essential medicines including those of cancer patients? ... that John Shakespeare wanted to impale his wife's family on his coat of arms? 00:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) PrOP-M on top of the Mars 3 lander ... that the Soviet rover PrOP-M (pictured) was intended to be the first rover on Mars in 1971, 26 years earlier than NASA's Sojourner? ... that Ryan Grubb was on the football coaching staff at South Dakota State University while pursuing a master's degree in sports pedagogy? ... that Squaring the Circle is Sneaker Pimps' first album in almost 20 years? ... that George Balanchine choreographed his ballet Scherzo à la Russe for the New York City Ballet's Stravinsky Festival, a tribute to the composer after his death? ... that Cédric Wermuth, the co-president of the Swiss Social Democrats, was once fined for squatting? ... that all charges against John S. Marmaduke for killing a fellow Confederate general in a duel were later dropped? ... that Jean Pierson, the former CEO of Airbus, once unbuckled his belt and dropped his trousers when pressed for a hard bargain while selling commercial jets? ... that a reviewer thought that the two-part "Friendship Is Magic" "[flies] off the rails in an orgy of oddly Spielbergian effects and philosophizing" during its climax? 23 November 2021 12:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Portrait of Barbara Stanwyck by Whitey Schafer ... that photographer Whitey Schafer (portrait of Barbara Stanwyck pictured) thought canned sex was better than cold cream? ... that Earth 300 has designed a climate research vessel that would include a molten salt reactor and a quantum computer? ... that the NBA 75 includes the only league MVP who was not among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History? ... that Hunuki Hunukitama traveled to Baltimore to negotiate the establishment of a Korean holy city in Niue? ... that the audience screamed when Ethel Merman first sang "Sam and Delilah"? ... that the starfish Luidia maculata eats its prey whole, and often leaves behind inedible fragments in the hollow in which it was lying? ... that climatologist Geert Jan van Oldenborgh's work was instrumental in proving that the 2021 European floods were made more likely by climate change? ... that Carol Publishing Group distributed a suicide manual? 00:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Lyndon B. Johnson taking the oath of office aboard Air Force One ... that Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) delivered the "Let Us Continue" address five days after assuming the presidency upon the assassination of John F. Kennedy? ... that pushbacks of migrants in the Aegean Sea have been described as "a human rights violation that encapsulates a will to eliminate a person's presence on the face of the planet"? ... that when Oregon journalist Larry Smyth was asked who he thought would win presidential elections, he invariably replied "the man who gets the most votes"? ... that the Central Khalsa Orphanage houses the first Guru Granth Sahib in braille? ... that Montana television station KOPR-TV brought forward its start date by several months, only to last just one year? ... that Esther Ze Naw, who appeared on the 2021 Time 100, was one of the few people in Myanmar who protested against Aung San Suu Kyi's defence of the military at the International Court of Justice in December 2019? ... that Capitalism in America was shortlisted for the 2018 Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award? ... that Kitty Ponse successfully changed the sex of toads? 22 November 2021 12:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Play media Money Musk ... that Thomas Jefferson and Henry Ford both took an interest in the folk tune and contra dance "Money Musk" (example pictured)? ... that the classic board game Jacquet was the benchmark for all tables games in France during the 19th century? ... that Charles Larson became one of the first Americans to teach African literature, after working in Nigeria for the Peace Corps to avoid the Vietnam draft? ... that the Filipino fraternity Alpha Phi Beta has been involved in instances of violence, including getting mauled by rival fraternities, such as Sigma Rho? ... that after he died in September 2021, John Boyden was revealed to have written under the pseudonym "Lunchtime O'Boulez"? ... that a short version of the Japanese stop motion film Junk Head was favorably reviewed by director Guillermo del Toro? ... that the sea slug Philinopsis depicta has no radula or jaws, and is thought to protrude its foregut and suck up its prey whole? ... that according to American sociologist Pauline Bart, "everything is data, but data isn't everything"? 00:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) A page of Mutinensis gr. 122 ... that Mutinensis gr. 122 (page pictured) is the only surviving manuscript to include portraits of all Byzantine emperors? ... that Nicholas Hasselbach introduced the first printing press to colonial Maryland in 1765? ... that the Commission on Elections was allowed to tabulate the results of the 2002 Puerto Princesa mayoral recall election but could not declare a winner right away? ... that Herb Plambeck was the founder of the National Plowing Match in Dexter, Iowa? ... that Cimbrian seeresses are said to have predicted the future by slitting the throats of war prisoners and studying how the blood trickled down into a cauldron? ... that the tributary Walnut Creek in Iowa was named for the black walnut trees which once lined the creek before early settlers cleared them? ... that Friedrich Hefty could not become an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Aviation Troops because of his interest in aviation? ... that the developer of Art Sqool did not attend art school? 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056932463" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 24 November 2021 1.2 23 November 2021 1.3 22 November 2021 1.4 21 November 2021 1.5 20 November 2021 1.6 19 November 2021 1.7 18 November 2021 1.8 17 November 2021 1.9 16 November 2021 1.10 15 November 2021 1.11 14 November 2021 1.12 13 November 2021 1.13 12 November 2021 1.14 11 November 2021 1.15 10 November 2021 1.16 9 November 2021 1.17 8 November 2021 1.18 7 November 2021 1.19 6 November 2021 1.20 5 November 2021 1.21 4 November 2021 1.22 3 November 2021 1.23 2 November 2021 1.24 1 November 2021 Did you know... 24 November 2021 12:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Victor 3900 ... that the Victor 3900 (example pictured) was the first electronic calculator using custom integrated circuits, allowing it to be "smaller than a typewriter"? ... that after being selected at the age of five for a role in the film Soldier Boy, Andrey Andreev memorized the entire 100-page script? ... that the 1959 Texas A&I Javelinas football team won the first of the school's seven NAIA Football National Championships? ... that Thomas Guggeis, who studied conducting and quantum mechanics, began at the Berlin State Opera as an assistant of Daniel Barenboim and became the youngest Staatskapellmeister there? ... that the title of the My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic episode "Filli Vanilli" references the lip-syncing scandal of the German-French R&B duo Milli Vanilli? ... that Aline Rocha, the first Brazilian woman to compete at the Winter Paralympic Games, also came third in the women's wheelchair race at the 2021 Berlin Marathon? ... that according to Human Rights Watch, U.S. maximum pressure against Iran has seriously threatened Iranians' right to health and access to essential medicines including those of cancer patients? ... that John Shakespeare wanted to impale his wife's family on his coat of arms? 00:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) PrOP-M on top of the Mars 3 lander ... that the Soviet rover PrOP-M (pictured) was intended to be the first rover on Mars in 1971, 26 years earlier than NASA's Sojourner? ... that Ryan Grubb was on the football coaching staff at South Dakota State University while pursuing a master's degree in sports pedagogy? ... that Squaring the Circle is Sneaker Pimps' first album in almost 20 years? ... that George Balanchine choreographed his ballet Scherzo à la Russe for the New York City Ballet's Stravinsky Festival, a tribute to the composer after his death? ... that Cédric Wermuth, the co-president of the Swiss Social Democrats, was once fined for squatting? ... that all charges against John S. Marmaduke for killing a fellow Confederate general in a duel were later dropped? ... that Jean Pierson, the former CEO of Airbus, once unbuckled his belt and dropped his trousers when pressed for a hard bargain while selling commercial jets? ... that a reviewer thought that the two-part "Friendship Is Magic" "[flies] off the rails in an orgy of oddly Spielbergian effects and philosophizing" during its climax? 23 November 2021 12:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Portrait of Barbara Stanwyck by Whitey Schafer ... that photographer Whitey Schafer (portrait of Barbara Stanwyck pictured) thought canned sex was better than cold cream? ... that Earth 300 has designed a climate research vessel that would include a molten salt reactor and a quantum computer? ... that the NBA 75 includes the only league MVP who was not among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History? ... that Hunuki Hunukitama traveled to Baltimore to negotiate the establishment of a Korean holy city in Niue? ... that the audience screamed when Ethel Merman first sang "Sam and Delilah"? ... that the starfish Luidia maculata eats its prey whole, and often leaves behind inedible fragments in the hollow in which it was lying? ... that climatologist Geert Jan van Oldenborgh's work was instrumental in proving that the 2021 European floods were made more likely by climate change? ... that Carol Publishing Group distributed a suicide manual? 00:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Lyndon B. Johnson taking the oath of office aboard Air Force One ... that Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) delivered the "Let Us Continue" address five days after assuming the presidency upon the assassination of John F. Kennedy? ... that pushbacks of migrants in the Aegean Sea have been described as "a human rights violation that encapsulates a will to eliminate a person's presence on the face of the planet"? ... that when Oregon journalist Larry Smyth was asked who he thought would win presidential elections, he invariably replied "the man who gets the most votes"? ... that the Central Khalsa Orphanage houses the first Guru Granth Sahib in braille? ... that Montana television station KOPR-TV brought forward its start date by several months, only to last just one year? ... that Esther Ze Naw, who appeared on the 2021 Time 100, was one of the few people in Myanmar who protested against Aung San Suu Kyi's defence of the military at the International Court of Justice in December 2019? ... that Capitalism in America was shortlisted for the 2018 Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award? ... that Kitty Ponse successfully changed the sex of toads? 22 November 2021 12:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Play media Money Musk ... that Thomas Jefferson and Henry Ford both took an interest in the folk tune and contra dance "Money Musk" (example pictured)? ... that the classic board game Jacquet was the benchmark for all tables games in France during the 19th century? ... that Charles Larson became one of the first Americans to teach African literature, after working in Nigeria for the Peace Corps to avoid the Vietnam draft? ... that the Filipino fraternity Alpha Phi Beta has been involved in instances of violence, including getting mauled by rival fraternities, such as Sigma Rho? ... that after he died in September 2021, John Boyden was revealed to have written under the pseudonym "Lunchtime O'Boulez"? ... that a short version of the Japanese stop motion film Junk Head was favorably reviewed by director Guillermo del Toro? ... that the sea slug Philinopsis depicta has no radula or jaws, and is thought to protrude its foregut and suck up its prey whole? ... that according to American sociologist Pauline Bart, "everything is data, but data isn't everything"? 00:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) A page of Mutinensis gr. 122 ... that Mutinensis gr. 122 (page pictured) is the only surviving manuscript to include portraits of all Byzantine emperors? ... that Nicholas Hasselbach introduced the first printing press to colonial Maryland in 1765? ... that the Commission on Elections was allowed to tabulate the results of the 2002 Puerto Princesa mayoral recall election but could not declare a winner right away? ... that Herb Plambeck was the founder of the National Plowing Match in Dexter, Iowa? ... that Cimbrian seeresses are said to have predicted the future by slitting the throats of war prisoners and studying how the blood trickled down into a cauldron? ... that the tributary Walnut Creek in Iowa was named for the black walnut trees which once lined the creek before early settlers cleared them? ... that Friedrich Hefty could not become an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Aviation Troops because of his interest in aviation? ... that the developer of Art Sqool did not attend art school? 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056932463" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 24 November 2021 1.2 23 November 2021 1.3 22 November 2021 1.4 21 November 2021 1.5 20 November 2021 1.6 19 November 2021 1.7 18 November 2021 1.8 17 November 2021 1.9 16 November 2021 1.10 15 November 2021 1.11 14 November 2021 1.12 13 November 2021 1.13 12 November 2021 1.14 11 November 2021 1.15 10 November 2021 1.16 9 November 2021 1.17 8 November 2021 1.18 7 November 2021 1.19 6 November 2021 1.20 5 November 2021 1.21 4 November 2021 1.22 3 November 2021 1.23 2 November 2021 1.24 1 November 2021 Did you know... 24 November 2021 12:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Victor 3900 ... that the Victor 3900 (example pictured) was the first electronic calculator using custom integrated circuits, allowing it to be "smaller than a typewriter"? ... that after being selected at the age of five for a role in the film Soldier Boy, Andrey Andreev memorized the entire 100-page script? ... that the 1959 Texas A&I Javelinas football team won the first of the school's seven NAIA Football National Championships? ... that Thomas Guggeis, who studied conducting and quantum mechanics, began at the Berlin State Opera as an assistant of Daniel Barenboim and became the youngest Staatskapellmeister there? ... that the title of the My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic episode "Filli Vanilli" references the lip-syncing scandal of the German-French R&B duo Milli Vanilli? ... that Aline Rocha, the first Brazilian woman to compete at the Winter Paralympic Games, also came third in the women's wheelchair race at the 2021 Berlin Marathon? ... that according to Human Rights Watch, U.S. maximum pressure against Iran has seriously threatened Iranians' right to health and access to essential medicines including those of cancer patients? ... that John Shakespeare wanted to impale his wife's family on his coat of arms? 00:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) PrOP-M on top of the Mars 3 lander ... that the Soviet rover PrOP-M (pictured) was intended to be the first rover on Mars in 1971, 26 years earlier than NASA's Sojourner? ... that Ryan Grubb was on the football coaching staff at South Dakota State University while pursuing a master's degree in sports pedagogy? ... that Squaring the Circle is Sneaker Pimps' first album in almost 20 years? ... that George Balanchine choreographed his ballet Scherzo à la Russe for the New York City Ballet's Stravinsky Festival, a tribute to the composer after his death? ... that Cédric Wermuth, the co-president of the Swiss Social Democrats, was once fined for squatting? ... that all charges against John S. Marmaduke for killing a fellow Confederate general in a duel were later dropped? ... that Jean Pierson, the former CEO of Airbus, once unbuckled his belt and dropped his trousers when pressed for a hard bargain while selling commercial jets? ... that a reviewer thought that the two-part "Friendship Is Magic" "[flies] off the rails in an orgy of oddly Spielbergian effects and philosophizing" during its climax? 23 November 2021 12:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Portrait of Barbara Stanwyck by Whitey Schafer ... that photographer Whitey Schafer (portrait of Barbara Stanwyck pictured) thought canned sex was better than cold cream? ... that Earth 300 has designed a climate research vessel that would include a molten salt reactor and a quantum computer? ... that the NBA 75 includes the only league MVP who was not among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History? ... that Hunuki Hunukitama traveled to Baltimore to negotiate the establishment of a Korean holy city in Niue? ... that the audience screamed when Ethel Merman first sang "Sam and Delilah"? ... that the starfish Luidia maculata eats its prey whole, and often leaves behind inedible fragments in the hollow in which it was lying? ... that climatologist Geert Jan van Oldenborgh's work was instrumental in proving that the 2021 European floods were made more likely by climate change? ... that Carol Publishing Group distributed a suicide manual? 00:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Lyndon B. Johnson taking the oath of office aboard Air Force One ... that Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) delivered the "Let Us Continue" address five days after assuming the presidency upon the assassination of John F. Kennedy? ... that pushbacks of migrants in the Aegean Sea have been described as "a human rights violation that encapsulates a will to eliminate a person's presence on the face of the planet"? ... that when Oregon journalist Larry Smyth was asked who he thought would win presidential elections, he invariably replied "the man who gets the most votes"? ... that the Central Khalsa Orphanage houses the first Guru Granth Sahib in braille? ... that Montana television station KOPR-TV brought forward its start date by several months, only to last just one year? ... that Esther Ze Naw, who appeared on the 2021 Time 100, was one of the few people in Myanmar who protested against Aung San Suu Kyi's defence of the military at the International Court of Justice in December 2019? ... that Capitalism in America was shortlisted for the 2018 Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award? ... that Kitty Ponse successfully changed the sex of toads? 22 November 2021 12:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Play media Money Musk ... that Thomas Jefferson and Henry Ford both took an interest in the folk tune and contra dance "Money Musk" (example pictured)? ... that the classic board game Jacquet was the benchmark for all tables games in France during the 19th century? ... that Charles Larson became one of the first Americans to teach African literature, after working in Nigeria for the Peace Corps to avoid the Vietnam draft? ... that the Filipino fraternity Alpha Phi Beta has been involved in instances of violence, including getting mauled by rival fraternities, such as Sigma Rho? ... that after he died in September 2021, John Boyden was revealed to have written under the pseudonym "Lunchtime O'Boulez"? ... that a short version of the Japanese stop motion film Junk Head was favorably reviewed by director Guillermo del Toro? ... that the sea slug Philinopsis depicta has no radula or jaws, and is thought to protrude its foregut and suck up its prey whole? ... that according to American sociologist Pauline Bart, "everything is data, but data isn't everything"? 00:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) A page of Mutinensis gr. 122 ... that Mutinensis gr. 122 (page pictured) is the only surviving manuscript to include portraits of all Byzantine emperors? ... that Nicholas Hasselbach introduced the first printing press to colonial Maryland in 1765? ... that the Commission on Elections was allowed to tabulate the results of the 2002 Puerto Princesa mayoral recall election but could not declare a winner right away? ... that Herb Plambeck was the founder of the National Plowing Match in Dexter, Iowa? ... that Cimbrian seeresses are said to have predicted the future by slitting the throats of war prisoners and studying how the blood trickled down into a cauldron? ... that the tributary Walnut Creek in Iowa was named for the black walnut trees which once lined the creek before early settlers cleared them? ... that Friedrich Hefty could not become an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Aviation Troops because of his interest in aviation? ... that the developer of Art Sqool did not attend art school? 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056932463" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 24 November 2021 1.2 23 November 2021 1.3 22 November 2021 1.4 21 November 2021 1.5 20 November 2021 1.6 19 November 2021 1.7 18 November 2021 1.8 17 November 2021 1.9 16 November 2021 1.10 15 November 2021 1.11 14 November 2021 1.12 13 November 2021 1.13 12 November 2021 1.14 11 November 2021 1.15 10 November 2021 1.16 9 November 2021 1.17 8 November 2021 1.18 7 November 2021 1.19 6 November 2021 1.20 5 November 2021 1.21 4 November 2021 1.22 3 November 2021 1.23 2 November 2021 1.24 1 November 2021 Did you know... 24 November 2021 12:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Victor 3900 ... that the Victor 3900 (example pictured) was the first electronic calculator using custom integrated circuits, allowing it to be "smaller than a typewriter"? ... that after being selected at the age of five for a role in the film Soldier Boy, Andrey Andreev memorized the entire 100-page script? ... that the 1959 Texas A&I Javelinas football team won the first of the school's seven NAIA Football National Championships? ... that Thomas Guggeis, who studied conducting and quantum mechanics, began at the Berlin State Opera as an assistant of Daniel Barenboim and became the youngest Staatskapellmeister there? ... that the title of the My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic episode "Filli Vanilli" references the lip-syncing scandal of the German-French R&B duo Milli Vanilli? ... that Aline Rocha, the first Brazilian woman to compete at the Winter Paralympic Games, also came third in the women's wheelchair race at the 2021 Berlin Marathon? ... that according to Human Rights Watch, U.S. maximum pressure against Iran has seriously threatened Iranians' right to health and access to essential medicines including those of cancer patients? ... that John Shakespeare wanted to impale his wife's family on his coat of arms? 00:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) PrOP-M on top of the Mars 3 lander ... that the Soviet rover PrOP-M (pictured) was intended to be the first rover on Mars in 1971, 26 years earlier than NASA's Sojourner? ... that Ryan Grubb was on the football coaching staff at South Dakota State University while pursuing a master's degree in sports pedagogy? ... that Squaring the Circle is Sneaker Pimps' first album in almost 20 years? ... that George Balanchine choreographed his ballet Scherzo à la Russe for the New York City Ballet's Stravinsky Festival, a tribute to the composer after his death? ... that Cédric Wermuth, the co-president of the Swiss Social Democrats, was once fined for squatting? ... that all charges against John S. Marmaduke for killing a fellow Confederate general in a duel were later dropped? ... that Jean Pierson, the former CEO of Airbus, once unbuckled his belt and dropped his trousers when pressed for a hard bargain while selling commercial jets? ... that a reviewer thought that the two-part "Friendship Is Magic" "[flies] off the rails in an orgy of oddly Spielbergian effects and philosophizing" during its climax? 23 November 2021 12:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Portrait of Barbara Stanwyck by Whitey Schafer ... that photographer Whitey Schafer (portrait of Barbara Stanwyck pictured) thought canned sex was better than cold cream? ... that Earth 300 has designed a climate research vessel that would include a molten salt reactor and a quantum computer? ... that the NBA 75 includes the only league MVP who was not among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History? ... that Hunuki Hunukitama traveled to Baltimore to negotiate the establishment of a Korean holy city in Niue? ... that the audience screamed when Ethel Merman first sang "Sam and Delilah"? ... that the starfish Luidia maculata eats its prey whole, and often leaves behind inedible fragments in the hollow in which it was lying? ... that climatologist Geert Jan van Oldenborgh's work was instrumental in proving that the 2021 European floods were made more likely by climate change? ... that Carol Publishing Group distributed a suicide manual? 00:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Lyndon B. Johnson taking the oath of office aboard Air Force One ... that Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) delivered the "Let Us Continue" address five days after assuming the presidency upon the assassination of John F. Kennedy? ... that pushbacks of migrants in the Aegean Sea have been described as "a human rights violation that encapsulates a will to eliminate a person's presence on the face of the planet"? ... that when Oregon journalist Larry Smyth was asked who he thought would win presidential elections, he invariably replied "the man who gets the most votes"? ... that the Central Khalsa Orphanage houses the first Guru Granth Sahib in braille? ... that Montana television station KOPR-TV brought forward its start date by several months, only to last just one year? ... that Esther Ze Naw, who appeared on the 2021 Time 100, was one of the few people in Myanmar who protested against Aung San Suu Kyi's defence of the military at the International Court of Justice in December 2019? ... that Capitalism in America was shortlisted for the 2018 Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award? ... that Kitty Ponse successfully changed the sex of toads? 22 November 2021 12:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Play media Money Musk ... that Thomas Jefferson and Henry Ford both took an interest in the folk tune and contra dance "Money Musk" (example pictured)? ... that the classic board game Jacquet was the benchmark for all tables games in France during the 19th century? ... that Charles Larson became one of the first Americans to teach African literature, after working in Nigeria for the Peace Corps to avoid the Vietnam draft? ... that the Filipino fraternity Alpha Phi Beta has been involved in instances of violence, including getting mauled by rival fraternities, such as Sigma Rho? ... that after he died in September 2021, John Boyden was revealed to have written under the pseudonym "Lunchtime O'Boulez"? ... that a short version of the Japanese stop motion film Junk Head was favorably reviewed by director Guillermo del Toro? ... that the sea slug Philinopsis depicta has no radula or jaws, and is thought to protrude its foregut and suck up its prey whole? ... that according to American sociologist Pauline Bart, "everything is data, but data isn't everything"? 00:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) A page of Mutinensis gr. 122 ... that Mutinensis gr. 122 (page pictured) is the only surviving manuscript to include portraits of all Byzantine emperors? ... that Nicholas Hasselbach introduced the first printing press to colonial Maryland in 1765? ... that the Commission on Elections was allowed to tabulate the results of the 2002 Puerto Princesa mayoral recall election but could not declare a winner right away? ... that Herb Plambeck was the founder of the National Plowing Match in Dexter, Iowa? ... that Cimbrian seeresses are said to have predicted the future by slitting the throats of war prisoners and studying how the blood trickled down into a cauldron? ... that the tributary Walnut Creek in Iowa was named for the black walnut trees which once lined the creek before early settlers cleared them? ... that Friedrich Hefty could not become an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Aviation Troops because of his interest in aviation? ... that the developer of Art Sqool did not attend art school? 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056932463" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 24 November 2021 1.2 23 November 2021 1.3 22 November 2021 1.4 21 November 2021 1.5 20 November 2021 1.6 19 November 2021 1.7 18 November 2021 1.8 17 November 2021 1.9 16 November 2021 1.10 15 November 2021 1.11 14 November 2021 1.12 13 November 2021 1.13 12 November 2021 1.14 11 November 2021 1.15 10 November 2021 1.16 9 November 2021 1.17 8 November 2021 1.18 7 November 2021 1.19 6 November 2021 1.20 5 November 2021 1.21 4 November 2021 1.22 3 November 2021 1.23 2 November 2021 1.24 1 November 2021 Did you know... 24 November 2021 12:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Victor 3900 ... that the Victor 3900 (example pictured) was the first electronic calculator using custom integrated circuits, allowing it to be "smaller than a typewriter"? ... that after being selected at the age of five for a role in the film Soldier Boy, Andrey Andreev memorized the entire 100-page script? ... that the 1959 Texas A&I Javelinas football team won the first of the school's seven NAIA Football National Championships? ... that Thomas Guggeis, who studied conducting and quantum mechanics, began at the Berlin State Opera as an assistant of Daniel Barenboim and became the youngest Staatskapellmeister there? ... that the title of the My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic episode "Filli Vanilli" references the lip-syncing scandal of the German-French R&B duo Milli Vanilli? ... that Aline Rocha, the first Brazilian woman to compete at the Winter Paralympic Games, also came third in the women's wheelchair race at the 2021 Berlin Marathon? ... that according to Human Rights Watch, U.S. maximum pressure against Iran has seriously threatened Iranians' right to health and access to essential medicines including those of cancer patients? ... that John Shakespeare wanted to impale his wife's family on his coat of arms? 00:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) PrOP-M on top of the Mars 3 lander ... that the Soviet rover PrOP-M (pictured) was intended to be the first rover on Mars in 1971, 26 years earlier than NASA's Sojourner? ... that Ryan Grubb was on the football coaching staff at South Dakota State University while pursuing a master's degree in sports pedagogy? ... that Squaring the Circle is Sneaker Pimps' first album in almost 20 years? ... that George Balanchine choreographed his ballet Scherzo à la Russe for the New York City Ballet's Stravinsky Festival, a tribute to the composer after his death? ... that Cédric Wermuth, the co-president of the Swiss Social Democrats, was once fined for squatting? ... that all charges against John S. Marmaduke for killing a fellow Confederate general in a duel were later dropped? ... that Jean Pierson, the former CEO of Airbus, once unbuckled his belt and dropped his trousers when pressed for a hard bargain while selling commercial jets? ... that a reviewer thought that the two-part "Friendship Is Magic" "[flies] off the rails in an orgy of oddly Spielbergian effects and philosophizing" during its climax? 23 November 2021 12:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Portrait of Barbara Stanwyck by Whitey Schafer ... that photographer Whitey Schafer (portrait of Barbara Stanwyck pictured) thought canned sex was better than cold cream? ... that Earth 300 has designed a climate research vessel that would include a molten salt reactor and a quantum computer? ... that the NBA 75 includes the only league MVP who was not among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History? ... that Hunuki Hunukitama traveled to Baltimore to negotiate the establishment of a Korean holy city in Niue? ... that the audience screamed when Ethel Merman first sang "Sam and Delilah"? ... that the starfish Luidia maculata eats its prey whole, and often leaves behind inedible fragments in the hollow in which it was lying? ... that climatologist Geert Jan van Oldenborgh's work was instrumental in proving that the 2021 European floods were made more likely by climate change? ... that Carol Publishing Group distributed a suicide manual? 00:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Lyndon B. Johnson taking the oath of office aboard Air Force One ... that Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) delivered the "Let Us Continue" address five days after assuming the presidency upon the assassination of John F. Kennedy? ... that pushbacks of migrants in the Aegean Sea have been described as "a human rights violation that encapsulates a will to eliminate a person's presence on the face of the planet"? ... that when Oregon journalist Larry Smyth was asked who he thought would win presidential elections, he invariably replied "the man who gets the most votes"? ... that the Central Khalsa Orphanage houses the first Guru Granth Sahib in braille? ... that Montana television station KOPR-TV brought forward its start date by several months, only to last just one year? ... that Esther Ze Naw, who appeared on the 2021 Time 100, was one of the few people in Myanmar who protested against Aung San Suu Kyi's defence of the military at the International Court of Justice in December 2019? ... that Capitalism in America was shortlisted for the 2018 Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award? ... that Kitty Ponse successfully changed the sex of toads? 22 November 2021 12:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Play media Money Musk ... that Thomas Jefferson and Henry Ford both took an interest in the folk tune and contra dance "Money Musk" (example pictured)? ... that the classic board game Jacquet was the benchmark for all tables games in France during the 19th century? ... that Charles Larson became one of the first Americans to teach African literature, after working in Nigeria for the Peace Corps to avoid the Vietnam draft? ... that the Filipino fraternity Alpha Phi Beta has been involved in instances of violence, including getting mauled by rival fraternities, such as Sigma Rho? ... that after he died in September 2021, John Boyden was revealed to have written under the pseudonym "Lunchtime O'Boulez"? ... that a short version of the Japanese stop motion film Junk Head was favorably reviewed by director Guillermo del Toro? ... that the sea slug Philinopsis depicta has no radula or jaws, and is thought to protrude its foregut and suck up its prey whole? ... that according to American sociologist Pauline Bart, "everything is data, but data isn't everything"? 00:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) A page of Mutinensis gr. 122 ... that Mutinensis gr. 122 (page pictured) is the only surviving manuscript to include portraits of all Byzantine emperors? ... that Nicholas Hasselbach introduced the first printing press to colonial Maryland in 1765? ... that the Commission on Elections was allowed to tabulate the results of the 2002 Puerto Princesa mayoral recall election but could not declare a winner right away? ... that Herb Plambeck was the founder of the National Plowing Match in Dexter, Iowa? ... that Cimbrian seeresses are said to have predicted the future by slitting the throats of war prisoners and studying how the blood trickled down into a cauldron? ... that the tributary Walnut Creek in Iowa was named for the black walnut trees which once lined the creek before early settlers cleared them? ... that Friedrich Hefty could not become an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Aviation Troops because of his interest in aviation? ... that the developer of Art Sqool did not attend art school? 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056932463" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Recent_additions Wikipedia:Recent additions - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Recent additions From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Archive page of the Main Page Did you know section "WP:DYKA" redirects here. For the list of approved Did you know nominations, see WP:DYKNA. Shortcut WP:DYKA This is a record of material that was recently featured on the Main Page as part of Did you know (DYK). Recently created new articles, greatly expanded former stub articles and recently promoted good articles are eligible; you can submit them for consideration. Archives are generally grouped by month of Main Page appearance. (Currently, DYK hooks are archived according to the date and time that they were taken off the Main Page.) To find which archive contains the fact that appeared on Did you know, go to article's talk page and follow the archive link in the DYK talk page message box. Current archive 2021 January February March April May June July August September October 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2014 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2013 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2012 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2011 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2010 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2009 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2008 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2007 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2006 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2005 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2004 Started February March April May June July August September October November December Edit the DYK archive navigation template "Did you know ...?" Introduction and rules WP:DYK General discussion WT:DYK Supplementary rules WP:DYKSG Nominations (awaiting approval) WP:DYKN Reviewing guide WP:DYKR Nominations (approved) WP:DYKNA Preps and queues T:DYK/Q Currently on Main Page T:DYK Main Page errors WP:ERRORS Archive of appearances WP:DYKA Statistics WP:DYKSTATS April 1 hooks WP:DYKAPRIL April 1 talk WT:DYKAPRIL Monthly wraps WP:DYKW v t e Contents 1 Did you know... 1.1 24 November 2021 1.2 23 November 2021 1.3 22 November 2021 1.4 21 November 2021 1.5 20 November 2021 1.6 19 November 2021 1.7 18 November 2021 1.8 17 November 2021 1.9 16 November 2021 1.10 15 November 2021 1.11 14 November 2021 1.12 13 November 2021 1.13 12 November 2021 1.14 11 November 2021 1.15 10 November 2021 1.16 9 November 2021 1.17 8 November 2021 1.18 7 November 2021 1.19 6 November 2021 1.20 5 November 2021 1.21 4 November 2021 1.22 3 November 2021 1.23 2 November 2021 1.24 1 November 2021 Did you know... 24 November 2021 12:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Victor 3900 ... that the Victor 3900 (example pictured) was the first electronic calculator using custom integrated circuits, allowing it to be "smaller than a typewriter"? ... that after being selected at the age of five for a role in the film Soldier Boy, Andrey Andreev memorized the entire 100-page script? ... that the 1959 Texas A&I Javelinas football team won the first of the school's seven NAIA Football National Championships? ... that Thomas Guggeis, who studied conducting and quantum mechanics, began at the Berlin State Opera as an assistant of Daniel Barenboim and became the youngest Staatskapellmeister there? ... that the title of the My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic episode "Filli Vanilli" references the lip-syncing scandal of the German-French R&B duo Milli Vanilli? ... that Aline Rocha, the first Brazilian woman to compete at the Winter Paralympic Games, also came third in the women's wheelchair race at the 2021 Berlin Marathon? ... that according to Human Rights Watch, U.S. maximum pressure against Iran has seriously threatened Iranians' right to health and access to essential medicines including those of cancer patients? ... that John Shakespeare wanted to impale his wife's family on his coat of arms? 00:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) PrOP-M on top of the Mars 3 lander ... that the Soviet rover PrOP-M (pictured) was intended to be the first rover on Mars in 1971, 26 years earlier than NASA's Sojourner? ... that Ryan Grubb was on the football coaching staff at South Dakota State University while pursuing a master's degree in sports pedagogy? ... that Squaring the Circle is Sneaker Pimps' first album in almost 20 years? ... that George Balanchine choreographed his ballet Scherzo à la Russe for the New York City Ballet's Stravinsky Festival, a tribute to the composer after his death? ... that Cédric Wermuth, the co-president of the Swiss Social Democrats, was once fined for squatting? ... that all charges against John S. Marmaduke for killing a fellow Confederate general in a duel were later dropped? ... that Jean Pierson, the former CEO of Airbus, once unbuckled his belt and dropped his trousers when pressed for a hard bargain while selling commercial jets? ... that a reviewer thought that the two-part "Friendship Is Magic" "[flies] off the rails in an orgy of oddly Spielbergian effects and philosophizing" during its climax? 23 November 2021 12:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Portrait of Barbara Stanwyck by Whitey Schafer ... that photographer Whitey Schafer (portrait of Barbara Stanwyck pictured) thought canned sex was better than cold cream? ... that Earth 300 has designed a climate research vessel that would include a molten salt reactor and a quantum computer? ... that the NBA 75 includes the only league MVP who was not among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History? ... that Hunuki Hunukitama traveled to Baltimore to negotiate the establishment of a Korean holy city in Niue? ... that the audience screamed when Ethel Merman first sang "Sam and Delilah"? ... that the starfish Luidia maculata eats its prey whole, and often leaves behind inedible fragments in the hollow in which it was lying? ... that climatologist Geert Jan van Oldenborgh's work was instrumental in proving that the 2021 European floods were made more likely by climate change? ... that Carol Publishing Group distributed a suicide manual? 00:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Lyndon B. Johnson taking the oath of office aboard Air Force One ... that Lyndon B. Johnson (pictured) delivered the "Let Us Continue" address five days after assuming the presidency upon the assassination of John F. Kennedy? ... that pushbacks of migrants in the Aegean Sea have been described as "a human rights violation that encapsulates a will to eliminate a person's presence on the face of the planet"? ... that when Oregon journalist Larry Smyth was asked who he thought would win presidential elections, he invariably replied "the man who gets the most votes"? ... that the Central Khalsa Orphanage houses the first Guru Granth Sahib in braille? ... that Montana television station KOPR-TV brought forward its start date by several months, only to last just one year? ... that Esther Ze Naw, who appeared on the 2021 Time 100, was one of the few people in Myanmar who protested against Aung San Suu Kyi's defence of the military at the International Court of Justice in December 2019? ... that Capitalism in America was shortlisted for the 2018 Financial Times and McKinsey Business Book of the Year Award? ... that Kitty Ponse successfully changed the sex of toads? 22 November 2021 12:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Play media Money Musk ... that Thomas Jefferson and Henry Ford both took an interest in the folk tune and contra dance "Money Musk" (example pictured)? ... that the classic board game Jacquet was the benchmark for all tables games in France during the 19th century? ... that Charles Larson became one of the first Americans to teach African literature, after working in Nigeria for the Peace Corps to avoid the Vietnam draft? ... that the Filipino fraternity Alpha Phi Beta has been involved in instances of violence, including getting mauled by rival fraternities, such as Sigma Rho? ... that after he died in September 2021, John Boyden was revealed to have written under the pseudonym "Lunchtime O'Boulez"? ... that a short version of the Japanese stop motion film Junk Head was favorably reviewed by director Guillermo del Toro? ... that the sea slug Philinopsis depicta has no radula or jaws, and is thought to protrude its foregut and suck up its prey whole? ... that according to American sociologist Pauline Bart, "everything is data, but data isn't everything"? 00:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) A page of Mutinensis gr. 122 ... that Mutinensis gr. 122 (page pictured) is the only surviving manuscript to include portraits of all Byzantine emperors? ... that Nicholas Hasselbach introduced the first printing press to colonial Maryland in 1765? ... that the Commission on Elections was allowed to tabulate the results of the 2002 Puerto Princesa mayoral recall election but could not declare a winner right away? ... that Herb Plambeck was the founder of the National Plowing Match in Dexter, Iowa? ... that Cimbrian seeresses are said to have predicted the future by slitting the throats of war prisoners and studying how the blood trickled down into a cauldron? ... that the tributary Walnut Creek in Iowa was named for the black walnut trees which once lined the creek before early settlers cleared them? ... that Friedrich Hefty could not become an officer in the Austro-Hungarian Aviation Troops because of his interest in aviation? ... that the developer of Art Sqool did not attend art school? 21 November 2021 12:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) The steamboat New York ... that Charles Dickens described the Long Island Sound steamboat New York (pictured) as "a sullen, cumbrous, ungraceful, unshiplike leviathan"? ... that the release of Lee Hyori's album It's Hyorish had to be moved forward after several tracks were illegally leaked? ... that Sam Gamgee was modelled on Great War batmen? ... that fashion model Rebecca Leigh Longendyke was inspired by Grey's Anatomy to get a degree in biomedical engineering? ... that Miriam Soljak, after fighting to recover her New Zealand nationality for nearly three decades, was told that the government considered she had never lost it? ... that men who refused, when challenged, to take an oath of loyalty to the government were not permitted to vote in the 1861 Maryland gubernatorial election? ... that although Sultan Muhammad Kaharuddin III died in 1975, his son only succeeded him in 2011? ... that to make the Belasco Theatre comfortable for performers, David Belasco banned spitting onto the floor? 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Original Trictrac board and equipment ... that Trictrac (board pictured) was the classic tables game of France, just as backgammon is of the English-speaking world today? ... that Russel and Mary Wright's American design "manifesto" Guide to Easier Living proposed that life was "engineering problems with scientific solutions"? ... that the telephone exchange in Craig's Court contains one of the entrances to the secret government tunnels under London? ... that Bob Ferry became general manager of the Washington Bullets by selling advertisements for its game programs, giving its upper management the impression that he "must know a lot about business"? ... that the tourist attraction Little Canada has a "Littlization Station" used to create scale 3D replicas of visitors to be placed in the exhibit? ... that 14 top art students in the Russian Empire revolted and quit their academy because of a competition theme? ... that Nancy Cappello was described as the "founder of the breast density education movement" for her campaign to inform women about the issue of mammograms failing to detect breast cancer? ... that the biggest Turdus is 23–28 centimetres (9–10 inches) in length? 20 November 2021 12:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Belle Delphine demonstrating her ahegao face ... that Belle Delphine's online popularity surged after she mimicked the orgasm faces (example pictured) featured in some Japanese manga? ... that Pteronepelys is known as the "winged stranger"? ... that only four NBA players have been named to all four of the league's anniversary teams? ... that staff members of the Embassy of the Philippines to the Holy See would stack rosaries by the windows so they could be blessed by the Pope? ... that when the New Jersey–born military officer Samuel Gibbs French sided with the South in the U.S. Civil War, residents of Woodbury, New Jersey, hanged him in effigy and stormed his summer home? ... that while stealing Pablo Picasso's 1939 painting Woman's Head, the thief cut his hand and claimed to have wiped the blood on a 16th-century sketch that he flushed down the toilet? ... that the first train headlight was simply a bonfire on a train car pushed in front of a locomotive? ... that while The New York Times Building was designed to protect against terrorist attacks, planners did not consider that the façade could be climbed until several people scaled it? 00:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Front page of The Anglo-African ... that The Anglo-African (pictured) was the first newspaper to be published in the British Colony of Lagos? ... that it has cost about the same to maintain Broomhead and More Hall Reservoirs as it did to build them in the first place? ... that Brazilian wheelchair racer Vanessa Cristina de Souza won a race despite completing the last two kilometres (1.2 mi) with a flat tyre? ... that the Sky Pool is both a swimming pool and a bridge between two apartment buildings? ... that Coastal Carolina football coach Chad Staggs has degrees in math education and tourism management? ... that the dust jacket of the book A Brightness Long Ago contained specks of gold foil? ... that Billy Strings's 2019 album Home stayed on Billboard's Bluegrass Albums chart for 77 consecutive weeks? ... that despite its common name of Santa Rita Mountain aster, Symphyotrichum potosinum can no longer be found in the Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona? 19 November 2021 12:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten ... that about 700 airmen – and Ida Veldhuyzen van Zanten (pictured) – have received the Dutch Airman's Cross? ... that Stembridge Gun Rentals supplied so many firearms to the film industry that when Chaplin producers asked for a rifle similar to that in Shoulder Arms, Stembridge had on hand the actual gun used? ... that more than 40 percent of women have dense breast tissue that increases the risk of breast cancer and makes it difficult for mammograms to identify tumors? ... that Metropolitan Opera star John Gurney performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" for sporting events in which his son, racing driver Dan Gurney, competed? ... that Oscarella tuberculata can reproduce by budding in a process unique among sponges? ... that Canadian diver Jeff Hirst won his event at the 1988 Canadian Championships despite having fractured his thumb five weeks before? ... that after discovering the mass graves of the Arnsberg Forest massacre, American soldiers ordered the entire local population to watch the exhumation? ... that the 1794 travelogue A Journey Around My Room contains details of the author's visits to his armchair and curtains? 00:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Detail of Henry VIII's horned helmet ... that the 1514 horned helmet of Henry VIII (pictured) has spectacles and a toothy grimace? ... that Rose Lee Maphis and her husband Joe Maphis, known as Mr. and Mrs. Country Music, helped develop the Bakersfield sound? ... that when watercress algae grows on degraded coral reefs, coral larvae settle on the seaweed as readily as they do on the rubble substrate? ... that Elizabeth Reiter portrayed the double role of Renee, an "icy wife", and Alice, an "insatiable lover", in the German premiere of Olga Neuwirth's opera Lost Highway? ... that Guy Gavriel Kay, author of Children of Earth and Sky, has been described as "contemporary fiction's finest fantasist"? ... that in the late 2000s the Campbell Soup Company began producing a spicier canned cheese sauce in their California and Texas plants than they did elsewhere to cater for different consumer tastes? ... that Miray Cin played for the Germany women's national U15, U16 and U17 football teams before she became a member of the Turkey women's national football team? ... that Phoenix radio station KTAR bought television station KTYL-TV to avoid a conflict with former U.S. senator Ernest McFarland? 18 November 2021 12:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Handbags made from ring-pulls ... that the "Angel of the dump", Jane Walker, helps people in Manila create handbags (pictured) from reused ring-pulls? ... that the 2021 Illinois vs. Penn State football game was the first in NCAA history to reach nine overtimes? ... that racehorse Tipperary Tim won the 1928 Grand National at odds of 100-1? ... that the notorious labor spy and killer Charles Lively was so successful infiltrating the coal miners union that he once posed for a photo with the famed labor activist Mother Jones? ... that Symphyotrichum molle, the soft aster, can be found only in the Bighorn Mountains of Montana and Wyoming? ... that the title of Something That May Shock and Discredit You, a memoir by Daniel M. Lavery that explores themes including gender transition, is taken from a scene in The Simpsons? ... that although the fruits of Cola verticillata are considered inedible, they contain caffeine and are used to make a beverage? ... that upon hearing about a 600-worker walkout reportedly prompted by difficulties she caused, Dee Duponte responded "fiddlesticks"? 00:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Susan Catania ... that Susan Catania (pictured) shocked male legislators by bringing her infant daughter to the floor of the Illinois House of Representatives and nursing her baby in the women's restroom? ... that the Allenby Formation has been called part of a "Great Canadian Lagerstätte"? ... that Satrio used water buffaloes to vaccinate 240,000 people against smallpox? ... that the Cello Sonata by John Foulds features quarter tones in the second movement, but it is uncertain if he introduced them in the 1905 version or the 1927 revision? ... that Scottish novelist Isla Dewar said "if ... a thing is not worth doing then it's worth doing fabulously, amazingly, with grace, style and panache"? ... that The West Wing episode "17 People" has an entire website created by a "superfan" with the sole purpose of explaining it? ... that Indian cricketer Bangalore Jayaram's English styled Mashie Lodge, was named after his favourite golf club, the Mashie Niblick? ... that the developers of the video game Golf Club: Wasteland jokingly announced that they would only sell one copy at a price of $500 million? 17 November 2021 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The Kilmainham Brooch, late 8th or early 9th century ... that the design and form of the late 8th- or early 9th-century Irish Kilmainham Brooch (pictured) was influenced by both earlier Pictish and contemporary Viking art? ... that Scott Isphording coached golf and baseball for a time while on the football coaching staff at Wittenberg University? ... that German fashion magazine Der Bazar had many spin offs, including Harper's Bazaar? ... that Ally Condie's dystopian Matched trilogy was inspired by a high school prom? ... that Iris Murdoch wrote a poem juxtaposing the outbreak of World War II with a seminar by Eduard Fraenkel? ... that, after tolerating him for years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs III expelled Carlos the Jackal from Hungary after the bombing of Radio Free Europe's headquarters in Munich? ... that the crew of a U.S. Navy blimp mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1942? ... that Wikipedia editors wrote over 40,000 words arguing over a single letter? 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Interior of the Palace Theatre ... that in the early 20th century, "playing the Palace" (interior pictured) was said to mark the pinnacle of a vaudeville entertainer's career? ... that the Turkish government tried to have the German music video "Erdowie, Erdowo, Erdogan" taken down because it insulted Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdo?an? ... that it was British classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens who suggested that Allied radio broadcasts during the Second World War use the opening notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony as a signature theme? ... that students and faculty from Fuchs Mizrachi School protested at Nazi guard John Demjanjuk's home in 1993, objecting to his release from Israeli prison and residence in the United States? ... that Ask la Cour, who came from Denmark, only planned to perform with the New York City Ballet for a few years, but spent two decades there and became a principal dancer? ... that glaciation in Wisconsin 17 thousand years ago helped create its unique geography? ... that after Gaudelia Díaz won a bronze medal at the 1992 Paralympics, she was asked to join Televisa by its CEO? ... that the Boston, Barre and Gardner Railroad never actually reached Boston or Barre? 16 November 2021 12:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Robert M. La Follette ... that despite contesting the 1924 presidential election as a third-party candidate, Robert M. La Follette (pictured) received approximately 16.6 percent of the popular vote? ... that the leader of the male Ustaše Youth group claimed to have placed ears of the Serbs he murdered on his necklace? ... that in Connecticut, there are statues of Revolutionary War hero Israel Putnam in Brooklyn, in Hartford, and in Redding? ... that the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository was called "one of the most important hubs for economic scholarship in the world" by Creative Commons? ... that reporter Bobbie Wygant got her first television show after filling in while its host was sick with the flu? ... that the Space Launch System rocket will generate nearly nine million pounds of thrust at liftoff? ... that David Arquette donated his earnings from his appearances in World Championship Wrestling to the families of dead and injured wrestlers? ... that Didi Gregorius tweets after every game his baseball team wins, and has dedicated emojis for his teammates? 00:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unity Dow ... that in Botswana, writer Unity Dow (pictured) took legal actions as a plaintiff, legal counsellor, and judge to challenge gender discrimination and protect indigenous rights, before becoming a legislator? ... that the song "House Party" by Super Junior was praised by Tedros Adhanom, the director-general of the WHO? ... that John Carter started his career as an early American colonial printer working as the apprentice of Benjamin Franklin? ... that the sea slug Berthellina edwardsii secretes a white acidic fluid that is distasteful to fish? ... that the new head coach for Washington State Cougars football once played in a football game two weeks after an appendectomy? ... that a wreck rediscovered in the former Royal Navy dockyard in Antigua in 2021 might be that of the French ship Beaumont, captured by the British in 1778? ... that surgeon Margaret Louden developed a treatment for people crushed by rubble during the The Blitz, but her contribution was forgotten until the 1990s? ... that when a ban on developing the Hotel Macklowe was revoked two years early, some New York City Council members said they did not realize that they had voted to rescind the ban? 15 November 2021 12:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the Bourbaki Panorama showing French soldiers piling arms ... that the 115-metre-long (377-foot) Bourbaki Panorama (detail pictured) depicts the internment of 88,000 French soldiers in neutral Switzerland at the end of the Franco-Prussian War? ... that Ernie Ross, the Member of Parliament for Dundee West, was nicknamed "the MP for Nablus West" due to his support of Palestinian nationalism? ... that the 1979 German song "Selig seid ihr, wenn ihr einfach lebt" offers eight beatitudes which include a blessing for living simply, and another for daring to be kind? ... that Myrtle Edwards's family objected to Seattle's Gas Works Park being named after her? ... that the protagonist of the novel Long Live the Post Horn! campaigns against a real European Union Directive? ... that the paddle steamer Keystone State was rumored to be carrying gold when she sank? ... that Khin Maung Lat, a servant at the king's palace in Ratnagiri, India, eloped with Princess Myat Phaya Lat against the will of the king and queen? ... that in 2017, the Hudson Theatre was both the newest Broadway theater and one of the oldest? 00:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Brahms am Flügel, 1896 ... that Willy von Beckerath, after studying at the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf, depicted Johannes Brahms at a grand piano (pictured)? ... that the original name of the sidewheel steamer CSS Maurepas, Grosse Tete, means "big head" in French? ... that the Russian Fort Raim was built in 1847 around the ruined mausoleum of Kazakh warrior Raiymbek Batyr? ... that after plans for the skyscraper Sutton 58 prompted a height limit for the surrounding area, construction went ahead anyway? ... that Osman Çakmak won the European Amputee Football Championship as a player in 2017 and as a manager in 2021 with the Turkey national team? ... that Sherita Hill Golden demonstrated that diabetics were more likely to develop depression and that those with depression were more likely to become diabetic? ... that the Japanese variety show Say You to Yo Asobi collaborated with the Japan Racing Association to create a special video about the Takarazuka Kinen horse race? ... that prior to entering politics, Bonifasius Belawan Geh collected edible bird's nests from the jungle after dropping out of college? 14 November 2021 12:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Lubin employees survey the vault fire's devastation ... that the 1914 Lubin vault fire (aftermath pictured) in Philadelphia destroyed several thousand unique early silent films? ... that Luc Tardif Sr. gained French citizenship in order to further his ice hockey career? ... that "Möge die Straße uns zusammenführen", a German song based on Irish toasts, was ranked fourth in a recent survey of favourite hymns? ... that Kane Ioane finished his playing career at Montana State as the Big Sky Conference's all-time tackles leader? ... that IBM spent US$50 million to develop the PCradio and expected to sell 100,000 units, but ended up selling just under 10,000? ... that Gerd Ruge received a twelve-year entry ban to the Soviet Union for having helped his friend Boris Pasternak financially? ... that the 1905 monument to the King's Liverpool Regiment is inscribed with the words Nec Aspera Terrent ("Difficulties be Damned")? ... that American evangelist J. Charles Jessup was called "The Great Gaspy"? 00:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Anne Saxelby ... that Anne Saxelby (pictured) was a pioneer in promoting American artisanal cheese? ... that even though Australian citizens are no longer British subjects, they can still vote in elections and stand for parliament in the United Kingdom? ... that Samsi Sastrawidagda, Indonesia's first finance minister, once leased the veranda of future president Sukarno's house for his accountant's office? ... that the RADCAL satellite, designed to have a three-year lifespan, operated for almost twenty? ... that the philosopher Emil Utitz, a classmate of Franz Kafka, became the head librarian of Theresienstadt Ghetto? ... that none of the six then-living CCNY players were interviewed for the 1998 documentary film City Dump: The Story of the 1951 CCNY Basketball Scandal? ... that New Zealand association football coach Olli Harder has worked in the US, China, Norway and England? ... that Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, a textbook dedicated to canines, was found by a specialist feline publication to be bereft of information about cats? 13 November 2021 12:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Corsi-Rosenthal Box ... that the Corsi-Rosenthal Box (example pictured) is a homemade air purifier that was designed during the COVID-19 pandemic as an alternative to more expensive air purification systems? ... that Lars Fause is the first governor of Svalbard to use the gender-neutral title Sysselmester? ... that the French animated film The Summit of the Gods is based on a Japanese manga series? ... that the Pixel 6 is the first smartphone to be powered by the Google Tensor system on a chip (SoC)? ... that Broadway producer Richard Aldrich penned a biography on his wife, the actress Gertrude Lawrence, after her death from cancer? ... that the 1996 song "Gott hat mir längst einen Engel gesandt", with text by Eugen Eckert and music by Thomas Gabriel, began as part of a rock oratorio about Daniel? ... that Rise Bar's management spent more than US$110,000 soundproofing the space, which holds just 74 patrons? ... that despite not being an economist, Sunarjo Kolopaking became dean for the faculty of economics at the University of Indonesia? 00:00, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Micah Joseph Lebensohn ... that Micah Joseph Lebensohn (pictured) began to translate poetry into Hebrew at the age of twelve? ... that to reflect the neighbourhood's heritage as a songbird-watching community, Singapore's Mayflower MRT station is decorated with 22 bird sculptures? ... that Earl Old Person, lifetime honorary Chief of the Blackfeet Nation, inadvertently broke a 1000-year tradition in 1971 when he asked the Shah of Iran to stand up? ... that the plant Dyssodia papposa was given to horses for coughs by the Dakota and smoked for epilepsy by the Keres? ... that the first pendulum clock was invented in 1657 by Christiaan Huygens? ... that Kursdorf is "the loudest village in Germany" and a "sound inferno"? ... that Ed Beauvais co-founded the "darling of deregulation"? ... that workers have the right to sit in some jurisdictions? 12 November 2021 12:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Engineers' Club Building ... that the Engineers' Club Building (pictured) and Engineering Societies' Building in New York City were described in the mid-20th century as "the engineering crossroads of the world"? ... that Andreas Reize assumed the post of Thomaskantor as the first Swiss and the first Catholic since the Reformation? ... that Johann Reinhold Forster's 1778 book Observations Made During a Voyage Round the World has been described as "the beginning of modern geography"? ... that Marguerite Dunlap sang in the first radio broadcast of WEAF in New York? ... that the streaming service Alchemiya has been dubbed the "Muslim Netflix"? ... that David Whitaker has been called "the father of the ISBN"? ... that for his appearance in the fourth-season finale of The Drew Carey Show, Hal Linden spoke with a German accent because he had trouble speaking with a Dutch accent? ... that Indonesian historian Sartono Kartodirdjo's father wanted him to be a doctor, but he refused as he claimed to be afraid of blood? 00:00, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Detail from the memorial ... that the First World War Kirkcudbright war memorial depicts a sword-wielding warrior with a sleeping child on his knee (pictured)? ... that a complaint over an allegedly illegal transmitter move led to Texas radio station KFQX-FM being forced off the air for four hours in 1988? ... that future rear admiral Robert Wertheim had a hand in the naming of the MIM-72 Chaparral? ... that Bagenal's Castle was originally thought to have been destroyed, but was rediscovered in 1996 in the premises of a bakery? ... that David Kennedy, co-founder of the agency that came up with Nike's Just Do It campaign, was once gifted 50 pairs of Levi's denims by his employees? ... that White Lake Provincial Park is the only provincial park in Ontario, Canada, with an exceptional provision allowing hydroelectric activity as a non-conforming use? ... that the painter and writer Hilda V?ka was involved in Latvian neopaganism and used Latvian mythology in her works? ... that the non-fiction book Corvus: A Life with Birds focuses on a rook named after a drag queen called "Madame Chickeboumskaya"? 11 November 2021 00:00, 11 November 2021 (UTC) Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware ... that Lesley Akyaa Opoku Ware (pictured), daughter of Asante ruler Opoku Ware II, simultaneously served as Ghana's ambassador to six countries? ... that there are three hydroelectric generating stations on the White River in Northern Ontario, Canada, all part-owned by First Nations? ... that Iranian-American aerospace engineer Joe Youssefi was posthumously awarded a gold medal for his collection of Persian stamps? ... that actor Frankie Muniz praised the Blackstarkids for their track "Frankie Muniz"? ... that the English botanists Jane Ingham and Joseph Hubert Priestley were the first to separate cell walls from meristematic tissues in broad beans? ... that KMXO near Abilene, Texas, aired the region's first Spanish-language radio program and later became its first full-time Spanish-language station? ... that hinges on arch bridges were introduced in 1858 and remain popular in modern civil engineering? ... that a branch line of the New Haven and Northampton Railroad was so difficult to build, the area was nicknamed "Satan's Kingdom"? 10 November 2021 00:00, 10 November 2021 (UTC) R. fuliginosa resting on a lotus flower ... that Rhyothemis fuliginosa (example pictured) is known as the "butterfly dragonfly"? ... that some lawyers and privacy experts have questioned the constitutionality of reverse search warrants in the United States? ... that Anne Makemie Holden bequeathed land to her male relatives so that they could vote? ... that Julius Caesar's portrayal of his actions in the Gallic Wars have led historians to call him one of history's first "spin doctors"? ... that Lorenza Böttner, a mouth and foot painter, had both of her arms amputated following an electric shock? ... that the 1992 book A Song for Arbonne is set in a fantasy world loosely based on 12th-century Provence? ... that former judge Steve Alm's successful campaign to be elected Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu was endorsed by the State of Hawaii Organization of Police Officers in 2019? ... that after starring in several films directed by Umberto Lenzi, actor Me Me Lai later worked as a police officer who confiscated them as "video nasties"? 9 November 2021 00:00, 9 November 2021 (UTC) Eva Olsson ... that after men took all the 2021 Nobel Prizes for science, one of the selectors, Eva Olsson (pictured), said "we want to have more women nominated"? ... that the woman of the Chatti was allegedly a Germanic prophetess whose advice inspired Roman Emperor Vitellius to murder his own mother, Sextilia? ... that in October 2021, American wheelchair racer Yen Hoang came in the top three in marathons on consecutive days? ... that the first East German embassy in Africa opened in Zanzibar in 1964? ... that American Computer and Peripheral was the first company to offer a plug-in board for Intel's 386 processor? ... that thanks to the advocate general's opinion, one is likely to know the outcome of a court case before the European Court of Justice before it even starts drafting the ruling? ... that SpaceX's reusable Starship launch vehicle has twice as much thrust as the Apollo program's Saturn V? ... that Canadian politician Above Znoneofthe chose his name so as to be placed last on alphabetical ballots? 8 November 2021 00:00, 8 November 2021 (UTC) Budge Patty ... that according to his brother, Budge Patty (pictured) would not budge? ... that the original release of Jason Shiga's comic Demon included a four-page issue, a sixty-page issue, and an issue in which all the panels were black? ... that 125 years ago today, the lifeboat Henry Ramey Upcher rescued the fourteen-man crew of the SS Commodore and three fishermen who had been stranded aboard her? ... that the women's race at today's New York City Marathon will feature two of the medalists from this year's Olympic marathon? ... that Osa Maliki opposed the introduction of the Guided Democracy, and as a result was removed from his position? ... that Cwmhiraeth's name roughly translates to "valley of longing"? ... that while the Empire of Japan did not actively participate in the Holocaust, it has been found to have committed war crimes of its own? ... that Citizens Square was almost named after Fort Wayne's Harry Baals? 7 November 2021 00:00, 7 November 2021 (UTC) Hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos ... that of the hundreds of hands stenciled at Cueva de las Manos as artwork (pictured), very few are right hands? ... that Colombian-born Susan Bernal is developing new cements that can reduce the substantial CO2 emissions currently caused by concrete? ... that the Columbus was a disposable ship, built from large quantities of North American timber and intended to be sailed to London where she would be dismantled to avoid cargo import duties? ... that deleted articles on Wikipedia may be "salted" so that they cannot be recreated? ... that Cher Scarlett is one of the leaders of #AppleToo, a workers' rights movement at Apple Inc.? ... that flowers of the arctic dandelion do not need to be pollinated in order to set seed? ... that British Turk Hüseyin Er won world and European championships with the Turkey national deaf football team? ... that a U.S. Supreme Court case had "odd bedfellows"? 6 November 2021 00:50, 6 November 2021 (UTC) Frank Jeremiah Armstrong ... that Frank Jeremiah Armstrong (pictured), the first African-American graduate of Cornell College, became an assistant to Booker T. Washington? ... that the African zebrawood is in danger of becoming extinct? ... that landscape architect Harriet Pattison collaborated with her lover Louis Kahn on the design of Four Freedoms Park and the grounds of the Kimbell Art Museum? ... that climate change in Malaysia may cause its mangroves to be inundated by sea level rise by 2060? ... that Ma?gorzata Kalinowska-Iszkowska was awarded a Polish Gold Cross of Merit for her work in information technology? ... that the Nashua, Acton and Boston Railroad was also known as the "Red Line" because it was consistently unprofitable? ... that the railway network in Lithuania will have its first high-speed line by 2026? ... that a mock funeral was held outside company headquarters during the 1986–1987 John Deere strike in which 700 union workers ceremoniously burned a coffin and a Christmas tree covered in company hats? 5 November 2021 00:00, 5 November 2021 (UTC) Self-Portrait with Cigarette ... that the 1895 painting Self-Portrait with Cigarette (pictured) by Edvard Munch was met with criticism of his amorality and "degeneration"? ... that in 1776 Robert Bell was commissioned by Thomas Paine to print Common Sense, considered the most inciteful work of the American Revolution? ... that the Raytheon 704, which cost more than $10,000 in 1970, was the first computer used for playing games by mail? ... that Marie Surcouf was the president of Stella, a club for French women aeronauts? ... that investment fund Engine No. 1 waged a successful proxy battle against ExxonMobil despite owning only 0.02 percent of the oil company's shares? ... that Hans Haselböck, later an international concert organist and professor at the Vienna Music Academy, began 65 years as organist at the Dominican Church, Vienna, on 4 November 1949? ... that for more than six decades no federal supreme court existed in the German territories until the Reichsoberhandelsgericht was formed in 1869? ... that a reviewer said that Richard Osman's The Man Who Died Twice has "more holes than a dodgy knitting pattern" but he "enjoyed every minute"? 4 November 2021 00:00, 4 November 2021 (UTC) Decorated belyana ... that belyanas (pictured) were giant disposable wooden ships used in the Volga region for timber rafting? ... that Arkansas linebacker Grant Morgan, originally a walk-on himself, signed a personality rights deal with Walk-On's Bistreaux and Bar? ... that melodies by Guillaume Franc, composed to French psalms published in Geneva in 1542, are still in use in the 21st century? ... that Reply Corporation went from competing against IBM with clones of the PS/2 to selling upgrade motherboards for them? ... that a group of farmers discovered The Young Woman of Amajac while preparing to till a citrus field? ... that Nintendo constructed a special retail box for The Incredible Hulk that features a comic strip built into its cover? ... that Grey Gowrie, while holding office under Margaret Thatcher, described himself as "Irishman with a Scots name and a German wife, working, somewhat to his surprise, for a very English government"? ... that the type specimen of the icefish Pagetodes, a synonym of Cryodraco, was stolen and eaten by a cat before it could be preserved? 3 November 2021 00:00, 3 November 2021 (UTC) Topre conical keyboard switch spring ... that the conical-spring in Topre's capacitive keyboard switch (example pictured) was inspired by a mosquito coil? ... that the 1936 Northeastern United States Flood directly led to the passage of the Flood Control Act of 1936 by the United States Congress? ... that with a force of just 3,500 men, French lieutenant colonel Natalis Constant Darche was able to hold up the advance of the German 5th Army for three weeks at Longwy in August 1914? ... that Piecemeal, who appeared in The Incredible Hulk: The Pantheon Saga, was considered one of the strangest characters to appear in a Marvel video game? ... that according to science fiction essayist Jacques Van Herp, the novella The End of Illa caused the temporary decline of French science fiction? ... that Mother Teresa defended Jesuit priest and child molester Donald McGuire against sexual abuse allegations? ... that in 1987, fans of C.D. Guadalajara attempted to dress the statue of Minerva in the team's shirt? ... that Lieutenant Colonel Richard John Andrews survived the Second Boer War, the First World War, the Russian Civil War and the Irish War of Independence only to be killed by a defective tool in his garage? 2 November 2021 00:18, 2 November 2021 (UTC) Lisa Federle with her mobile surgery service ... that Lisa Federle's mobile surgery service (pictured) for refugees was adapted to be a mobile test station during the COVID-19 pandemic? ... that at one point in its political history, the Philippines was represented in the Spanish Cortes Generales? ... that Johannes Schröder composed an oratorio honouring Katharina Kaspar, who became a new saint in 2018? ... that HMS Cicala was commanded at the 1941 Battle of Hong Kong by a one-armed veteran of the 1916 Battle of Jutland? ... that Robert Weiner taught AP English Literature while coaching football at Henry B. Plant High School? ... that it took five years of observations to find the planet orbiting the star HD 175167? ... that manuscript illuminator Gioacchino de' Gigantibus worked for six different popes during his lifetime? ... that Hogwarts School of Prayer and Miracles rewrote Harry Potter to replace magic with prayer and supernatural phenomena? 1 November 2021 00:00, 1 November 2021 (UTC) Feetloaf ... that parsnips serve as sawed-off tibiae in feetloaf (pictured)? ... that the account of the Haliurunas in the 6th century history of the Goths, the Getica, is a precursor to later Christian traditions that wise women had sex and orgies with demons and the Devil? ... that the New Amsterdam Theatre, once described as "a vision of gorgeousness", later had dead cats in the basement and mushrooms growing through the floor? ... that from 1960 to 1981, executions in East Germany took place in Leipzig Prison in the middle of a residential area? ... that the Battle of Saint Charles featured what is known as the deadliest shot of the American Civil War? ... that the Germanic seeress Waluburg is only known from a pot shard found on the island Elephantine in southern Egypt? ... that the opera The Devil and Daniel Webster features a jury of ghosts made up of famous historical American figures who are now residents of Hell; including the pirate Blackbeard? ... that Florissantia flowers were possibly pollinated by bats? v t e Main Page and featured content Main Page topics Errors Administrator instructions Main Page alternatives FAQ Editing Design Queue Yesterday Tomorrow History Wikipedia languages Sister projects Sandbox April Fools' Day Don't delete! Today's featured article Requests Pending requests Recent Oddities Most viewed Not yet used Featured articles Criteria Candidates Log Review Archive Statistics Former featured articles Unreviewed Did you know... Discussion Rules Supplementary rules Nominations Reviewing guide Preps & Queues Removed hooks Archive Stats In the news Error reports Nominations Discussion Admin guide General criteria Death criteria Recurring items Awards Sports Discussion Archives Candidate archives Current events portal Current events portal for sports Discussion How the Current events portal works How to archive the portal Selected anniversaries Discussion Holidays and observances All Today's featured list Submissions Statistics Previously run lists Get involved Featured lists Criteria Candidates Log Task force Removal candidates Review list Log Former featured lists Picture of the day Guidelines Unused Archive Tomorrow Featured pictures Criteria Candidates Nomination procedure Featured topics Featured topics on the main page Candidates Log Nomination procedure Criteria Removal candidates Good topics Former featured topics Featured topic questions Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Recent_additions&oldid=1056932463" Hidden categories: Project pages with short description Wikipedia semi-protected project pages Wikipedia move-protected project pages Wikipedia Did you know archives Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read View source View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages Alemannisch ????? ?????????? (???????????) Deutsch Español Français ??? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia ??????? Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu ??? Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português ??????? ???? ???? ????? Simple English Tagalog ????? ???????/tatarça Türkçe ?????????? ?? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 12:00 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement