https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH RudolfRed, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 Beginner's Query 2 Question 3 Inquiry about pending article list 4 There is a question about my sources whether they are independent or primary. 5 My Gill Stegall article 6 What to do with blank pages? 7 Sebastian Mikosz 8 Declined entry 9 Most Vandalised Pages 10 What to do about users with promotional or vanity userpages? 11 Notability question, academic/lawyer Draft:Priti_Krishtel 12 Large list of suggested edits not showing up on talk page? 13 page edit not accepted 14 hi 15 How to create an archive of my talk page? 16 Question 17 Unfair deletion of an article 18 Maximum 19 Speedy deletion nomination of Draft:Corrado Maria Saglietti 20 Delete discussion 21 Status of resubmission 22 Bot 23 Page Statistics 24 Link to the german-language Wikipedia 25 Movember 26 Question from K5gproWiki (15:59, 16 November 2021) 27 Capital punishment in the Bible 28 Funk art 29 Citations 30 How to give warnings with Twinkle tags 31 Difficulty understanding Wiki's definition of notability 32 Como editar uma página da wikipedia 33 Follow-up to Repeated non-acceptance of a Wiki Page Need A Reviewer who is Knowledgable about Gospel Music 34 Adding a footnote citation to top of a Wikipedia entry that already has other footnote citations 35 Popularity of any one particular article 36 Question regarding copyright 37 Dear whoever is going to read this. 38 Is there a place that's not as drastic as AfD for getting a second opinion on an article? 39 Ingleside (Amelia Courthouse, Virginia) 40 The Future of Wikipedia 41 Userpage 42 Wikitampering: One chart, 52 weeks 43 Cultural Appropriation Not Right!!! From an Indigenous Lens 44 Regarding to biography page 45 hlep me in publishing new article on laxminiya Youth club 46 Draft:Shyam Sunder Jyani 47 Experimenting With Country Data Templates 48 BPL 49 new round of discussions regarding the controversy section in the "Our Lady of Fátima" page 50 Follow-up to How to write about a "Group of companies" in wikipedia 51 Problems with submission 52 Image size 53 Question about Draft:Ezekiel Clark 54 Shortcut Button for reply 55 Wikipedia Teahouse Archive 56 Notability of Troom Troom 57 Article for Creation: Van Romaine 58 PLEAS HELP ME, i cant not publish my draft 59 How to create click to drop down segments of an article? 60 Can a short blurb selling a book be a source? 61 Citing Muckrock for government materials 62 Efn template not working properly 63 Adding entries to authority control template with wikidata 64 What to do about unsourced, promotional, biographical articles? 65 Notability References 66 Any advice on editing? 67 Citation vs link 68 Accidental creation of a page 69 Who are the authors? AFD and step 4 trying to bundle article 70 How to link up/bundle AFD deletion discussion with related pages 71 Ginger? 72 Can I start my own newsletter? 73 Tips on creating a user page 74 Citations 75 Wiki Did You Know 76 I do not understand why a New York Times reference has been flagged as an unreliable source. Help? 77 How is everyones day 78 Vandalism on page Kanchi Kamakoti Peetham by anonymous user ip 79 How to move articles from sandbox to the main space 80 Editing the content of a page 81 Declined Article due to notability 82 I would like to add people on Merseyside people on that Wikipedia page need to be guided through it? 83 Long quotation in a talk page 84 Edição 85 List of countries 86 Edit to Atom (software) 87 David Leigh Clark 88 Dr. Vin Gupta 89 Permission for a photo 90 Need help to re-edit page to remove a content problem panel. 91 Sumner bio 92 Edit reversion 93 "spamming" Most recent archives 1112, 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131 Beginner's Query[edit] Hi. I'm completely new to the world of Wikipedia (although I have been watching it with a somewhat passive interest) and I wanted to ask a question based on an 'if'. If I were to create an article and I make sure that it's notable, will it get rejected or accepted? or is there any other policy (There are seemingly a lot of them) that I might not uphold I will appreciate all ResponsesGuyForceOne (talk) 04:50, 12 November 2021 (UTC). GuyForceOne (talk) 04:41, 12 November 2021 (UTC) You mean, if the subject were notable, GuyForceOne? No, that wouldn't guarantee acceptance. Please see Help:YFA. -- Hoary (talk) 04:46, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the response, Hoary.GuyForceOne (talk) 04:51, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, GuyForceOne. Determining that the topic is actually notable is the most important first step in creating a new article, but not the only necessary step. The reliable sources devoting significant coverage to the topic need to be converted into informative references, and those refences need to be added to the draft article in the right places . The content of those references needs to be summarized neutrally in the prose that you write, and the summary needs to exclude copyright violations or other violations of policies and guidelines. When all of those factors are taken into consideration when writing a new article, it is highly likely to survive. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 06:42, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, GuyForceOne, and welcome to the Teahouse and Wikipedia. To use an analogy I employ increasingly often, your question is a bit like "I am new to the building trade. If I build a house will it stand up or fall down?" The answer is that if you try that today, it will either fall down, or cost you a lot of pain and more experienced builders a lot of effort, in making it solid. My advice to new editors is always to put aside the idea of creating a new article for at least six months while you "learn the trade". I remember when I was a new editor, and I desperately wanted to "make my mark" by creating a new article; but that is not the only way to add value to Wikipedia, and until you have learnt the trade, it is a particularly poor way to try and do so. --ColinFine (talk) 11:36, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the response,ColinFine but I feel like you answered my question thinking that I 'WILL' make a new article whereas I based my question on an 'if'. Still, thanks.GuyForceOne (talk) 09:16, 13 November 2021 (UTC) I think if you are fairly confident that you have a notable subject, you should go ahead and create your article. I created mine when I knew nothing about Wikipedia but there’s many helpful people in the teahouse who helped. I’ve learnt so much writing my first article. Unless you get your hands dirty, you’ll never really learn. I’ve learnt more from my mistakes than what I read up. Unless you’re the kind who can spend a few months taking a course on wikipedia and start right. Elenatina (talk) 09:27, 13 November 2021 (UTC) I am going to slightly disagree. if you can accept that your work might disappear [(https://www.theverge.com/2017/9/3/16226038/wikipedia-deleted-wiki-titles-articles 400 articles of all ages are deleted for 800 articles created)] and you think even if it does you will learn things then it's worthwhile. (I can't find the stat or Wikipedia:Articles for Creation stat). Your first articles will take about 4 hours. If you can create a page ,and you don't choose to go through Articles for Creation, then it could be marked for deletion within 5 minutes. After 10 to 20 minutes of AfD editors' times spread over a few days, it could then be deleted in 7 days. . Now, if you still want to go ahead, and you have no connection with the subject, then read Wikipedia:Articles_for_deletion current discussions for awhile, so you can understand how they work, and why they are so distrustful because of the amount of effort some people put into scams and spam. Good Luck Wakelamp d[@-@]b (talk) 10:28, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Elenatina Can you advise what courses there are on Wikipedia? Wakelamp d[@-@]b (talk) 10:28, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for your response,Elenatina. Your advice has been carefully noted and I also have the time to take a course.GuyForceOne (talk) 09:34, 13 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Writing_Wikipedia_Articles_course @Wakelamp — Preceding unsigned comment added by Elenatina (talk • contribs) 10:52, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Thank-you. Wakelamp d[@-@]b (talk) 11:50, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Question[edit] Hi! My question is that after reading the queries on Teahouse, I want to know how do I find the 'substandard' articles. Do I have to manually search for them, or is there another way?( I know this question sounds silly, but responses are appreciated GuyForceOne (talk) 05:24, 12 November 2021 (UTC) @GuyForceOne: Hello and Welcome to the Teahouse. I have a good news and a bad news about your question. The good news: Many articles with problems are already tagged and appear in subcategories of Category:Wikipedia article cleanup. The bad news: there are still thousands of substandard articles out there that haven't been tagged or improved. Those are a bit trickier to find, as you pretty much have to stumble across them. Victor Schmidt (talk) 05:40, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Hi GuyForceOne. Not a silly question, but also not one to easily answer without knowing what you mean by substandard articles. I'm not sure a perfect article exists, but there is a general way of assessing articles as explained here. So, you could look for articles which have a low assessment and then then try and improve them. These assessments (outside of WP:FA and WP:GA articles), however, can be quite subjective and perhaps an article with a low assessment is actually not all that bad at all. There are also lots of article which have been tagged with maintenance templates because someone feels/felt such articles have problems that need addressing, You can find these articles listed in categories like Category:Wikipedia maintenance categories sorted by month, but you might also try looking at Wikipedia:WikiProject Guild of Copy Editors since the members of that WikiProject seem to keep track of articles that need attention. -- Marchjuly (talk) 05:42, 12 November 2021 (UTC) @GuyForceOne Also, if you want to find an article that has the same kind of problems as one you were just working on, look at the "hidden categories" that are shown at the bottom of the "edit source" page for each article. -- asilvering (talk) 06:23, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Welcome @GuyForceOne, I am going to guess and think that you are looking for an area to concentrate on. Personally, I have spent a lot of time randomly reading articles that interested me and correcting them. That made me happy, and now I am off trying to understand why some errors and that made me happy. I saw on your user page that you are skilled in grammar and you speak a second language. You could have a look at the area below - and if it doesn't work out try somewhere else BUT always try to be doing at least two different things and if you don't like it, or feeling yourself getting upset, then move or stop for awhile Wikipedia:Pages needing translation into English#Translated pages that could still use some cleanup Wakelamp d[@-@]b (talk) 12:45, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for your responses @Victor Schmidt,@Marchjuly and @Asilvering.GuyForceOne (talk) 08:42, 12 November 2021 (UTC) @GuyForceOne: One definition of "substandard" is "questionable notability". These would be in Category:All articles with topics of unclear notability or more specifically for this month, Category:Articles with topics of unclear notability from November 2021. Article topics with doubtful notability should either be deleted (propose for deletion at Wikipedia:Articles for deletion) or improved by adding citations to reliable sources that are independent of the article subject. Another definition of "substandard" might include articles that have been modified by an editor with a conflict of interest (COI), or worse, by an undisclosed paid editor (such editors need to disclose they're being paid, or get blocked). Articles tagged with COI are in Category:Wikipedia articles with possible conflicts of interest or a dated category like the notability one above. Articles tagged with paid editing are in Category:Wikipedia articles with undisclosed paid content or a similar dated category. I'd consider articles with notability, COI, or paid-editing problems to be a higher priority for cleaning up than articles with cleanup templates. And there are thousands to choose from. Good luck! ~Anachronist (talk) 19:47, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the response, User:Anachronist.GFO (talk) 03:17, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Inquiry about pending article list[edit] hello everyone! i hope you all are having a nice day as its children's day today. i am Stobene45 I have a small question, where can I find the list of pending article topics? And please tell if there are any errors in my format. thankyou Stobene45Stobene45 (talk) 06:39, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Stobene45 (talk) 06:39, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Stobene45, Hello. You can find the list of pending article list in Category:AfC pending submissions by age. Thank you. Richard M William (talk) 06:49, 14 November 2021 (UTC) thankyou soo much Richard M William. Can you also tell about the requested article list? thankyou 9Stobene45 (Stobene45) — Preceding undated comment added 07:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) @Stobene45: there is a list at Wikipedia:Requested_articles. Unfortunately potential new articles can linger on that list for ever, because no one is obliged to write them. If you want to have a go, there will be plenty of grateful people! Elemimele (talk) 10:23, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Elemimele thankyou soo much for help. I will try to help as much as possible :) Stobene45 (Stobene45) — Preceding undated comment added 06:54, 16 November 2021 (UTC) There is a question about my sources whether they are independent or primary.[edit] I was told by a reviewer that all my sources appear to be primary. when I checked the first three, I saw a lab's work that was contracted much like we contract Quest labs to do our urinalysis or bloodwork. The 2nd and 3rd are links to the FDA where it lists the company as bonafide and one of its researchers that does clinical trials. My company does not control what these other three put out, especially the FDA. So I'm confused why they would be considered primary sources. Before I take the time to put up what I consider further independent sources, Like from clinicaltrials.gov, I need to know where I stand, so if I can get some guidance from someone, I'd appreciate it. The product PPP001 is very significant and the first cannabis flower plant to be in a Phase 2 and Phase 3 clinical trial as a drug. Each pellet of it is made to exact specifications. They even have a synthetic version. No cannabis plant has ever gone through Phased FDA and Health Canada clinical trials to become a prescription drug before, so this is a first in the field. I checked my first three references. One is another company's output on PPP001, their analysis. They objectively analyze data from a Tetra Biopharma clinical trial done under the FDA and/or Health Canada. Then I showed two references at the FDA US Food and Drug Administration showing that the company, TBP, is indeed registered with them as a recognnized organization (SRO) etc. But the editor considered those to be primary, if I read correctly. I'd like a quick review of the page and also of my additional sources I collected to add. I can cut and paste from my Wordpad when you are ready to see those: a number are from clinicaltrials . gov. I think a cursory glance would suffice on those to tell. Thank you. Thanks. MightyMaven (talk) 14:39, 14 November 2021 (UTC) MightyMaven, Hello and welcome to the teahouse! The source you've mentioned isn't Reliable, which means that sources need editorial integrity to allow verifiable evaluation of notability, per the reliable source guideline. Secondary, which provides an author's own thinking based on primary sources, generally at least one step removed from an event. Independent, which means excludes works produced by the article's subject or someone affiliated with it. For example, advertising, press releases, autobiographies, and the subject's website are not considered independent. You mentioned a website clinicaltrials.gov which is a website of governmental agency. But it is not regarded as reliable source. More at WP:GNG. Thank you. Richard M William (talk) 14:53, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Richard. The first source is a bonafide research organization which provides their own thinking, composition and analysis of the research done by Tetra Biopharma. The work is Alta Vista's own thinking and it is based on the clinical trial data at the FDA or Health Canada or both, so the article is not the work of Tetra BioPharma but it scientifically covers it. It is also independent since that means it's not the company in question's advertising, press release, autobiography or website. I will check about clinicaltrials.gov not being reliable. So FDA and Health Canada and NIH database are considered all not reliable? this is very strange to hear. Are you certain the FDA and these other government agencies are not considered reliable? I will look at the reference, but that makes no sense to call FDA, HC, clinicaltrials.gov not reliable, if you ask me. They are the ones who approve the drugs our doctors recommend. If there is some nuance I am missing, I will try to grasp it. Thank you for your reply and reference for me to read. — Preceding unsigned comment added by MightyMaven (talk • contribs) 15:25, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Okay, I got this from your Reliable link. It says, and I quote, "Scholarship WP:SCHOLARSHIP: Prefer secondary sources – Articles should rely on secondary sources whenever possible. For example, a paper reviewing existing research.... — Preceding unsigned comment added by MightyMaven (talk • contribs) 15:29, 14 November 2021 (UTC) MightyMaven, Yeah, you're right now. Newspapers, books and e-books, magazines, television and radio documentaries, reports by government agencies, and academic journals' website are considered as reliable, secondary and independent. Richard M William (talk) 15:45, 14 November 2021 (UTC) That's why I confirm with FDA, Health Canada, NIH, and clinicaltrials.gov. To quote Wikipedia on reliability where you sent me... "Sources may encompass published works in all forms and media, and in any language. Availability of secondary sources covering the subject is a good test for notability. (So to know for certain if a company's claims of conducting clinical trials Phase 1-3 are true, rather than quote the company itself, I quote FDA, HC, clinicaltrials.gov to prove it, not a company PR.) The Wikipedia guideance also states that "Sources"[2] should be secondary sources, (such as FDA and clinicaltrials.gov which gets its information from the FDA as to what trials are being conducted, all independently from the company claiming to be in clinical trials) as those provide the most objective evidence of notability. So I don't see what the problem is using FDA, HC, clinicaltrials and AltaVista (an independent company that's published it's analysis of Tetra Biopharma's research. I'm also going by what Maggie Dennis says about it. She's Interim Chief of Community Engagement, Wikimedia Foundation, and the company expert on what Wikipedia considers a reliable news source or source of information and what criteria go into making that determination. — Preceding unsigned comment added by MightyMaven (talk • contribs) 16:02, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Reliability page also states that "Reliable scholarship – Material such as an article, book, monograph, or research paper that has been vetted by the scholarly community is regarded as reliable, where the material has been published in reputable peer-reviewed sources or by well-regarded academic presses." This is exactly why I quote the NIH database of peer-reviewed articles on the pharmaceutical pages I contribute to. That Altavista publication is capable to be listed in the NIH database. It also refers to NIH dataased articles in major journals. I kinda think people are thinking that marijuana is totally void of notoriety, therefore FDA Phase 2 and 3 clinical trials must be bogus and not for real. I assure you they are for real. — Preceding unsigned comment added by MightyMaven (talk • contribs) 16:07, 14 November 2021 (UTC) You have a tendency toward walls of text (your User page!!!) which makes it difficult for volunteers here at Teahouse and elsewhere to wade through and then offer advice. Your recent interests are Draft:PPP001 and HU-308, which appear to be related. The first was declined in June and you have not edited since. The reviewer identified refs as being primary sources. I will add that many do not meet the requirements of WP:MEDRS. At HU-308 you increased the length of the article by more than 10X by adding large amounts of content and references that do not meet WP:MEDRS. By that, I mean all in vitro research, all animal research and all individual clinical trials. Subsequently, editors have made large deletions, but much remains that has no valid reason to be in the article. Lastly, given that both relate to cannabis, I will ask if you have conflict of interest or paid relationship to this topic? David notMD (talk) 16:53, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Given that the OP's fourth sentence above begins My company does not control..., it seems there is a COI. @MightyMaven: you should read WP:COI and make a declaration of any conflict of interest on your user page. CodeTalker (talk) 17:47, 14 November 2021 (UTC) MightyMaven, all biomedical information in a Wikipedia article must be based on sources that meet the high standards in Wikipedia:Identifying reliable sources (medicine). Your first source was co-authored by people employed by AltaVista and Tetra Biopharma, and therefore is is not an independent source, and cannot be used to establish notability. The fact that clinical trials are underway does not make a drug notable. Please read Wikipedia: WikiProject Medicine and its associated standards and Manual of Style. When you write My company does not control what these other three put out, especially the FDA. So I'm confused why they would be considered primary sources, that indicates that you are confusing "primary" with "independent". The FDA is a primary source here, and the first source is primary and not independent. Independent, secondary reliable sources are always preferred. Your statement also shows that you have a conflict of interest and must comply with the required Paid contributions disclosure. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 18:03, 14 November 2021 (UTC) At Draft:PPP001 I have left a recommendation that the draft as written be rejected. Speedy deletion is also a consideration, as content appears to have been copy-pasted verbatim. possibly representing a copyright violation. Consider also that this appears to be WP:TOOSOON. Only after clinical trials are complete, published in peer-reviewed journals (not conference abstracts) and then covered in reviews written by people with no connection to the company could this be reconsidered. David notMD (talk) 18:46, 14 November 2021 (UTC) In addition to making a User page paid contributions disclosure for PPP001, do the same for HU-308. In the interim, I have tagged HU-308 as being contributed to be an undisclosed paid editor. David notMD (talk) 19:11, 14 November 2021 (UTC) If you were stating "My company..." as to how your company operates, but there is no connection between you/your company and PPP001 or HU-308, state that clearly and succinctly on your Talk page. David notMD (talk) 17:20, 16 November 2021 (UTC) My Gill Stegall article[edit] My article on Gill Stegall is easy to find, since it's my only article. The first person to review it was helpful and I followed his/her advice on referencing. Now I've had it denied two more times, one by someone saying it's "just not a newsworthy person" or whatever (I didn't realize everyone has to be the Queen of England), and then the next person denying it simply came back saying the references weren't good enough. Really? United Press International articles are not adequate references. Maybe this person is too young to even realize what the UPI was. I would like someone to look at it again and be fair about it. Hubdb39 (talk) 06:26, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Pinging Devonian Wombat, TipsyElephant, and Gpkp for their thoughts. TheTechnician27 (Talk page) 06:31, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, you make a good point about UPI, now sunk so low. (But I haven't looked at either of the two UPI sources that are cited.) However: someone saying it's "just not a newsworthy person" or whatever. I don't see this. Just what did the person say, and where did they say it? -- Hoary (talk) 06:45, 15 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary:, It seems to me that the content in the denial-tag: ?This submission's references do not show that the subject qualifies for a Wikipedia article' is interpreted as 'non-newsworthy' or 'non-notable'. @Hubdb39: Here are few concerns over the draft: *The draft is still lacking inline citations, which is necessary as a proof for all the content mentioned. *The references are mentioned as plain links, on which WP:REFB and WP:RS can be referred. *There is a useful guidline on press-release sources: WP:PRSOURCE. --Gpkp [u • t • c] 07:16, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Gpkp, you or I may believe that every assertion in an article ought to come with at least one clearly identifiable reference, but English-language Wikipedia does not demand this. Inline citations are not "necessary as a proof for all the content mentioned". -- Hoary (talk) 07:35, 15 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: do you agree to accept and publish the draft to article, without having a single inline-citation? --Gpkp [u • t • c] 07:53, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Gpkp, I'm not going to accept it or reject it. American team sports are a complete mystery to me; thus for example "professional football wide receiver and slot back" (in the very first sentence) makes no sense to me. It's obvious that a great number of Wikipedia editors have at least some understanding of (American) football, so I'll leave this to one or more of them. -- Hoary (talk) 08:09, 15 November 2021 (UTC) @Hubdb39: @Hoary: and @Gpkp: I've cleaned up the article (improving wording, adding in-line refs, etc.) and moved the page to mainspace, as he meets the notability criteria. BeanieFan11 (talk) 01:21, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I suggest you search the The Atlanta Journal-Constitution as they may have a number of references to him Wakelamp d[@-@]b (talk) 13:37, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hey Hubddb39 ! I've just visited the draft and i've added to some relevant WiKiprojects to get more help, and reorganized it. There is one problem though, you haven't linked the references to where you used it. It makes verifying content a lot harder so please match it! i am not a bot , and just sounded like one in this comment. This action was NOT made automatically. Leomk0403 (talk) 08:53, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Yeah, look at articles for other American football athletes to see how to incorporate the refs into the body of the article. Help:Referencing for beginners may help. David notMD (talk) 12:26, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you all! — Preceding unsigned comment added by Hubdb39 (talk • contribs) 23:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) What to do with blank pages?[edit] I've been trying to cleanup Category:All uncategorized pages , but metTemplate:Di-conflicted license-notice. This template has no content, so i've nominated it at WP:TfD. So my question is, what to ex with blank pages, in all namespaces, in general exept for nominating it for WP:AfD/RfD/TfD? Leomk0403 (talk) 07:17, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Leomk0403, in case of article, you can move it to draft instead nominating by using this script. Richard M William (talk) 08:21, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks @Richard M William ! You're talking if the subject meetls the Wp:N guidelines right? Leomk0403 (talk) 08:32, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Leomk0403, Yeah, if the article doesn't meet with WP:N guideline then you should move it. Richard M William (talk) 08:30, 15 November 2021 (UTC) @Leomk0403 @Richard M William Before considering moving to draft please study WP:DRAFTIFY. The Draft: namespace is not intended as deletion by the back door. FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 08:49, 15 November 2021 (UTC) After hearing your comments , i think treating it like a vandalized article would be the best (e.g reverting to the last constructive edit) or add more data to it is one of the best solutions P.S is there any guidelines for this problem? Leomk0403 (talk) 08:57, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Richard M William FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me Guys, this guy actually has no idea what hes doing with GA articles. He nominated this [1] without contributig to the article, second he instantly failed Talk:Pale mountain pigeon/GA1. 112.163.180.40 (talk) 13:10, 15 November 2021 (UTC) @112.163.180.40 please WP:AGF and WP:BITE. Leomk (Don't shout here, Shout here!) 09:05, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Sebastian Mikosz[edit] Hi. I want to get a clearer understanding for the eligibility criteria for a Wiki entry. I have submitted an entry on Sebastian Mikosz, who is the EVP of Environment at the International Air Transport Association. He is a former CEO of Polish LOT airlines and Kenya Airways. He has been credited with helping return both airlines to profitability. The sources I quoted were interviews and news articles in the Financial Times, Reuters and the Associated Press. I also work as a consultant for IATA so it is part of my job to try and establish a Wiki page for him. Before IATA I was a journalist for more than 30 years including 18 years at CNN. I believe that he is a worthy enough candidate for a Wiki page, with strong media coverage to back it up. The last comment was that the subject (Sebastian) was basically not worthy of an entry. I respect the editor's decision but would like to know why. Kind regards. Andrew Astevens888 (talk) 11:48, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Astevens888 (talk) 11:48, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Astevens888 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you have not already, please review conflict of interest and paid editing for information on required formal disclosures you must make. Wikipedia has articles, not mere "pages". This is a subtle but important distinction. Interviews and press releases do not establish notability as Wikipedia defines a notable person. What is needed are independent reliable sources that are not based on the subject's own words or any other materials put out by them(or their organization). Company CEOs are often notable, but not always- there must be significant coverage of them in independent reliable sources. Your draft was rejected, meaning that it won't be considered anymore, because the reviewer felt that the likelihood of such sources was low. 331dot (talk) 11:52, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Astevens888. Please also consider the fact that if at some point Wikipedia has an article about Mikosz (whoever writes it), the article will not belong to him, will not be for his benefit, will not be under his or your control, will not necessarily contain what you or he would like it to contain, and should be almost entirely based on what people unconnected with him have chosen to publish about him, good or bad, not on what he or his associates say or want to say. --ColinFine (talk) 18:14, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Astevens888, the references in your draft that display properly as online references are bare URLs, which are unsightly, confusing and make verification difficult. Some of your references are formatted in such a strange way that they do not even show URLs. Please read Referencing for beginners, and reformat your references so that each and every one of them displays correct bibliographic information and links to websites when they exist. This is especially important for the references that would verify that he was the CEO of LOT and Kenya Airways, since those positions are his most plausible claim of notability. As for your long career, that is very nice and congratulations. But it means very little here on Wikipedia. What matters here is the quality of your contributions to this encyclopedia, and to be frank, your references are all botched up. Please fix them and then ask here for another look. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 07:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Declined entry[edit] Added header ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 15:05, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Can you explain to me why the entry I submitted "Historical Bioarchaeology" was declined as not worthy of being a separate article, while for example the entry "Medieval bioarchaeology", is sufficient for a separate article? Thank you in advance! Anna karligkioti (talk) 15:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Draft:Historical bioarchaeology Karenthewriter (talk) 16:17, 15 November 2021 (UTC) @Anna karligkioti: There was an earlier discussion to merge Medieval bioarcheaology and bioarcheology Talk:Bioarchaeology#Proposed merge with Medieval bioarchaeology, but the consensus seemed to be to do nothing. I think there's just too much content specific to the medieval branch, so a "fork" was justified. Perhaps start a discussion at Talk:Bioarchaeology, or see if you can merge your draft into the main article. If it doesn't work, then a fork will make sense. BTW - many of us are OCD pedants here, so I went through your draft and fixed the title headers and fixed the order of the punctuation and ref tags. Ref tags come after punctuation. Good luck! TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 22:45, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much Tim! I will try to do my best! — Preceding unsigned comment added by Anna karligkioti (talk • contribs) 08:20, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Most Vandalised Pages[edit] Which pages are the most vandalised on Wikipedia?  Damianlewis21 (talk) 20:17, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Damianlewis21. Unsurprisingly, that information can be found at Wikipedia:Most vandalized pages. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 23:37, 15 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think that page is up to date considering it's a historical and non-functional page. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 14:55, 16 November 2021 (UTC) What to do about users with promotional or vanity userpages?[edit] Hi, I've been browsing the user creation log recently, looking for vandalism, and I have come across several users like User:TopViralTrending and User:Exoticanimals1, whose only edits are the creation of a promotional user page. This really seems like it's against the rules. At the very least they are obviously not here to build an encyclopedia and using Wikipedia as a web host, but what do I do about them? Do I report the user on WP:ANI? Is this enough to get them blocked by itself? Do I request speedy deletion of the user page? Do I do both? Do I just not care since the user page won't show up in searches and takes up basically no storage space, so the admins time is better spent on more destructive vandals? Thanks for any advice! Knuthove (talk) 01:40, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Knuthove. You are correct in both cases. In the future, promotional usernames should be reported to Wikipedia:Usernames for administrator attention. The shortcut is WP:UAA. Please read Wikipedia:Criteria for speedy deletion to learn how to tag inappropriate pages for deletion, and the shortcut is WP:CSD. In these cases, G11 is the appropriate tag. I am an administrator and have blocked both accounts and tagged both pages. You may wonder why I didn't just delete those pages. I think it is best to have another administrator involved in these cases, just in case I may have misunderstood the situation. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 01:59, 16 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Hi Knuthove. Both of the pages have already been deleted or tagged for deletion by an administrator; so, there's not much to be done with respect to them. For furture reference though, all user pages are expected to comply with WP:UP and those which fall under WP:UP#NOT are generally not considered appropriate. So, the simple answer would be to follow WP:UP#On others' user pages: (1) try and explain the above to the user in question, and then (2) tag the user page for speedy deletion or "fix" the page yourself if the user in question doesn't respond or otherwise does nothing to make their user page policy compliant. However, things aren't always so simple and users are generally given a bit of leeway when it comes to their user pages. For example, more experienced editors who are clearly WP:HERE for reasons other than mucking around on their user page might be given a little more slack when it comes to UP#NO unless the page is really really problematic, whereas the deletion ax tends to more readily fall with respect to newer editors who have very few edits in the WP:MAINSPACE who appear to be more WP:NOTHERE than anything else. Such user pages tend to be more readily tagged for speedy deletion per WP:U5 than perhaps the user pages of more experienced and established editors. Bascially, you sort of have to do a little self-assessing to see what type of editor you're dealing with and then go from there. Such discussions about user pages (particularly user pages of established editors) can become contentious quite quickly and end up creating lots of drama which in the long run might not be to anyone's benefit; so, sometimes simply asking an administrator to take a look first might be a better approach than jumping in with both feet and tagging pages for deletion. -- Marchjuly (talk) 02:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for both your replies and the quick blocks! I guess these were pretty obvious, but what about users like User:Ayazayoob.96, User:Systemandpain or User:Dj Banx? My guess is that I should request CSD for the user page of the first one under "A7. No indication of importance (people, animals, organizations, web content, events)", and explain a bit to the user, but not report him. Perhaps link to WP:YFA and WP:BIO? And do I do anything about the last two? Knuthove (talk) 02:18, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I'm not an adminstrator, but in my opinion I don't think any of the three cases you've mentioned above require that anyone be reported. Each of these people appear to be new or newish editors who simply might not be aware of relevant policy regarding user pages. Honest good-faith mistakes are often made by editors simply because they don't know any better, not because they're intentionally trying to create problems or otherwise cause trouble. In addition, I don't think it would be appropriate to try and apply WP:A7 in the first case simply because that criterion applies to the article namespace and not the user namespace. Perhaps you could argue that WP:U5 would apply here, but again that might depend on what you think the intent of the editor in question really was. Many people mistake Wikipedia for a type of social media site and think their user page is like a profile page. Many people mistakenly try to create new articles on their user page because they thinks that's what needs to be done. These are just misunderstanding that can often be resolved through talk page discussion per WP:BITE without needing to have any pages deleted or any editors reported. My guess is that the editor in the first case probably just is mistakening his user page for a social media type profile. The account has only made a couple of edits so far and probably just doesn't no any better. So, perhaps adding a welcome template to their user talk page would be a good place to start. You could then add {{uw-userpage}} or a more personal message advising them about WP:UP and the other things you mentioned above if you want. Then, if they respond in an unfavorable way or don't respond at all after a reasonable amount of time, you could tag the page for speedy deletion per WP:U5. As for the other two editors, they two appear to be quite new with only a couple of edits; so, you can do the same thing for them as well. However, the content on their respective user pages is basically just a few words which is probably not worth deleting the page over. If they start to add more and more inapprorpriate content, then perhaps something might need to be done at that time. Right now, however, both pages seem to be pretty minor violations of policy not really requiring that further action be taken. -- Marchjuly (talk) 04:51, 16 November 2021 (UTC) That sounds like a good course of action. I'll read WP:UP and write User:Ayazayoob.96 a message. Thanks again for your advice. Knuthove (talk) 15:28, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Notability question, academic/lawyer Draft:Priti_Krishtel[edit] I submitted this article for review Draft:Priti_Krishtel I stated that I think she is notable in the normal way, but also notable due to criteria 7 of WP:ACADEMIC. If I am correct about the former, I may be over-complicating it by mentioning the later. There is a short discussion at Draft_talk:Priti_Krishtel where the reviewer and I discuss and they suggest I write here to get more experienced reviewer's eye on this. CT55555 (talk) 02:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @CT55555: A quick glance at the sourcing suggests that your draft would benefit from having one or two more in-depth profiles of Krishtel. The sources you added appear to be more about her initiatives than her. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 07:25, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Large list of suggested edits not showing up on talk page?[edit] I just made a large list of suggested edits here: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Talk:Solar_Simulator&redirect=no However, it appears that any link to this list of suggested edits is not found in the talk page of the article: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Solar_simulator Can someone help me figure out what I did wrong, and how can I get the list of suggested edits onto the appropriate talk page so it will be visible and reviewed appropriately? FreshAlien (talk) 02:58, 16 November 2021 (UTC) It's a capital letter thing. Your huge block of proposed content is at Talk:Solar Simulator, whereas the redirect to Talk:Solar simulator does not carry that content with the redirect. David notMD (talk) 03:11, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Moved (with attribution) FreshAlien's edit request to Talk:Solar simulator#Large update and expansion suggestions for Solar Simulator Article per suggestion at contested technical move requests (permalink). Rotideypoc41352 (talk · contribs) 16:07, 16 November 2021 (UTC) page edit not accepted[edit] User talk:24.52.202.85 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search November 2021 Information icon Hello, I'm DuncanHill. I wanted to let you know that one or more of your recent contributions to Jacob Rothschild, 4th Baron Rothschild have been undone because they did not appear constructive. If you would like to experiment, please use the sandbox. If you have any questions, you can ask for assistance at the Teahouse. Thanks. DuncanHill (talk) 13:27, 15 November 2021 (UTC) A few comments: 1.) What does "do not appear constructive" mean? My update is true, but not constructive? Does sharing truth so that people can perhaps one day be brought to judgment not matter at Wikipedia? 2.) "please use the sandbox". Are you trying to be non-confrontational? If you don't allow facts to be added to web pages, then say it, don't add a deflecting clause like that, you come off as weak. 3.) I don't have any real questions, these are rhetorical. Now go lock my account like a useful idiot. BigdogNova (talk) 05:42, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Everything on Wikipedia has to be referenced to a reliable source. Wikipedia's definition of "truth" can be thought of as: "someone in a reliable newspaper said it". If you posted something that you considered true, even if it were self-evidently true, it will have been removed if you couldn't back up your statement by pointing to some reliable newspapers who said it. Wikipedia also adopts a neutral point of view; it's not the place to campaign, or to right great wrongs. In this instance, your comment appears not only to have been deleted, but to have been suppressed from normal view, so I can't judge. But I'm guessing you wrote something highly negative with no source. That's the Wikipedia equivalent of finding someone guilty without a trial. We don't do things without evidence. I'm sorry that it's caused you disappointment, but I hope this explanation helps to provide background. Elemimele (talk) 06:46, 16 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Content added to Jacob Rothschild, 4th Baron Rothschild by IP 24.52.202.85 was deemed to be such a serious violation of Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons that it needed to be Wikipedia:Revision deleted by an administrator. As for your questions, non-constructive is basically an edit that isn't considered an improvement or helpful and it can cover various things. Generally, it means a edit made that doesn't comply with one or more of Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Sharing the truth is fine, but Wikipedia content needs to be verifiable in addition to being true. Furthermore, it's not the purpose of Wikipedia to bring people to judgement. This doesn't mean that negative content about persons cannot be added to articles, but it does mean that any such content needs to be written in a neutral tone, reliably sourced and not be undue. Facts can be added to articles, but they need to be verifiable facts which reflect what reliable sources are saying about something. The template added to the IPs user talk page was just a general user warning template designed to cover a broad range of situations. Its intent isn't to deflect, but rather to inform an editor that some of their edits are problematic and provide with information as to why. Since the content the IP added was deemed to be so bad that it needed to be revision deleted, it's no longer visible to anyone other than administrators. If you're the editor who added it, then you should know what it was and thus understand why it was removed. Wikipedia may be the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but it's not a free for all where anything goes. Content which is deemed to be a serious violation of relevant Wikipedia policies and guidelines can be removed by anyone at anytime; this is particularly true when the content is about living persons as explained here. If you want to edit Wikipedia and be WP:HERE, then great and there are lots of editors who can help you figure out how to best do that. If, however, you want to be WP:NOTHERE, then you're going to find yourself running into problems non-stop and perhaps even eventually ending up with your account locked. The choice is yours, but Wikipedia isn't like social media where you can pretty much post whatever you please. -- Marchjuly (talk) 07:16, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @BigdogNova: I can't see what you added, but DuncanHill felt it was worth removing forever. Other than that, this query is the only contribution associated with your account. After a long yet productive day helping others who truly want to make this encyclopedia a better place for everyone, I can only read your comment and think WP:NOTHERE. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 07:17, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, BigdogNova. The unreferenced and therefore unverifiable edit in question to Jacob Rothschild, 4th Baron Rothschild was made by an IP address, presumably you based on your comments. You are accusing, without providing any evidence, that this living person is responsible for starting a war that has led to hundreds of thousands of deaths. I hope that you can see that such a claim requires very solid evidence in the form of coverage in impeccably reliable sources. Your confrontational comment, Now go lock my account like a useful idiot is quite pointy and really quite ridiculous. You have now been informed that adding unreferenced attacks on living people is unacceptable, no matter how much you believe conspiracy theories about them. So, you can either follow Wikipedia's Policies and guidelines, or be blocked if you choose to violate them. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 07:39, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @BigdogNova: I am the editor who reverted your edit and posted the warning on your talk page, as well as reporting it for oversight or revision deletion. I did this because 1) it was an uncited addition to a biography of a living person, 2) it was a gross libel on that person, and most disturbingly 3) it repeated a hoary old anti-Semitic conspiracy theory in an article about a member of probably the most famous Jewish family in the world, an article which has been subjected to repeated anti-Semitic vandalism in the past. I would have absolutely no hesitation whatsoever in doing the same again. I am happy to explain my actions here, but they are something for which I shall never apologise. DuncanHill (talk) 15:49, 16 November 2021 (UTC) hi[edit] hi,Anyone? Athena-en (talk) 07:16, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Athena-en: Please don't remove the COI template from Xian Jun Loh without a discussion. And please see WP:COI. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 07:21, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Timtempleton:?received.07:52, 18 November 2021 (UTC) How to create an archive of my talk page?[edit]  Excellenc1 (talk) 07:20, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Excellenc1: Ask and you shall receive. Please see Help:Archiving a talk page. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 07:22, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Question[edit] There is a draft of an article in the English Wikipedia (see this [2]. It was declined previously because it was in Bengali language. I am a Bengali, and my native language is also Bengali. It is someone's article, but I want to translate the article, and then resubmit the article in AFC. What is the most correct and legal way to do the same? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 07:45, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Itcouldbepossible. Although this specific situation is unusual, the general principles described at Wikipedia:Translation apply. You are responsible for proper attribution, for checking that the cited sources actually verify the content, that the topic meets the English Wikipedia's notabilty guidelines, and the accuracy of the translation although you can make justifiable changes to the content. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 08:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible, Hello! It is perfectly "legal" for you to edit drafts like these and submit them for review when you think they're ready. "Draft:" drafts are open for everybody like articles, but "User:" drafts are not. However, it could be polite to ask the creator of draft first, but there is no guarantee they will see your question soon or at all. WP:BOLD is fine. My advice is to first collect the sources that would make this topic meet WP:GNG, without them the article won't be accepted in mainspace. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 08:07, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @@Gråbergs Gråa Sång: Well can I move that draft to my sandbox, and then edit it?Itcouldbepossible (talk) 08:50, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible No, just edit it where it is. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 08:51, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Gråbergs Gråa Sång: Ok, thank you for your suggestion. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unfair deletion of an article[edit] Hello I had an article about a famous person on Wikipedia and I wad editting expanding it day by day when I suddenly faced with its deletion and following up the matter the user: JBchrch who had put the speedy deletion on my page said because it "seemed like" I was a fan of him!! This could only be out of cruelty and unfair to delete a page just because a person is famous and popular and the writer of his article might like him especially when nothing was against the Wiki rules and guidelines! I wonder if anyone out there in Wiki headquarters could help me retrieve my article or say what should I do for this injustice going on? R30591 (talk) 08:33, 16 November 2021 (UTC) courtesy ping: JBchrch  melecie  t - 08:49, 16 November 2021 (UTC) failed that first courtesy ping. JBchrch  melecie  t - 08:50, 16 November 2021 (UTC)  Courtesy link: Shahab Moradi You need to provide reliable, independent sources that show that he is indeed notable. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:01, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @R30591: The article has been deleted once, and I can't see the history of that version, but the present article is not nominated for deletion at all. As far as I can tell, JBchrch is trying to give you good advice on your talk page. From your phrasing it's evident that you're too attached to Moradi, making it hard for you to stay from a neutral point of view. I would also suggest you to try editing other subjects, and if you haven't already, complete The Wikipedia Adventure to get a crash course on how things work around here. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:19, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Per action minutes ago, now at Draft:Shahab Moradi. Because it appears that an earlier version was Speedy deleted, that version is not visible to non-Administrators. The advice about learning more about how Wikipedia works before returning to work on the draft is good advice. David notMD (talk) 11:25, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Just wanted to say, thanks a lot @Ganbaruby: for helping me out with my article too, haha. (I'm writing my article for the same reason as R30591) WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:52, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Maximum[edit] What is the maximum number of questions I can ask on Teahouse? I have already asked many. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 08:54, 16 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! there is no limit, feel free to ask away! happy editing!  melecie  t - 08:55, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hmmmm. There have been instances in the past wherein a new editor asked question after question at Teahouse, but otherwise was making no contributions to existing articles nor attempting to create a new article. WP:NOTHERE (as in NOT HERE) states that editors may be warned or blocked if clearly not here to improve the encyclopedia. David notMD (talk) 11:36, 16 November 2021 (UTC) In other words, as long as you are asking questions and also making helpful contributions (possibly using what you learn from asking questions) then there's no limit. But as David said above if all you're doing is asking questions then NOTHERE can apply and you can be warned/blocked. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 14:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Blaze The Wolf I feel like it's also unfair that users who get blocked from editing can't ask questions at the Teahouse. Because I feel users have the right to still ask questions even when edit-blocked. It's sad. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:55, 16 November 2021 (UTC) They can ask questions about their block on their user talk page, unless they abuse that right. --bonadea contributions talk 07:31, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Speedy deletion nomination of Draft:Corrado Maria Saglietti[edit] Hello. I submitted the Draft page: Corrado Maria Saglietti and the page has been deleted. If I understood correctly, the reason for the cancellation was that the bio was too similar to that of the website of the same name. Furthermore, the review of the page led to this result: "Your recent article submission to Articles for Creation has been reviewed! Unfortunately, it has not been accepted at this time. The reasons left by KylieTastic were: This submission is not adequately supported by reliable sources. I would like to ask if I can try to publish the same page again with the following changes: inserting more reliable sources/ references and changing the biography and the photo. Thanks! Corrado57 Corrado57 (talk) 09:31, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Corrado57: The message on your talk page explains that the original draft article was a copyright infringement, as you obviously realise. Wikipedia takes copyright very seriously and the only way to get an article about Saglietti approved will be to rewrite it from scratch using your own words, based on the sources. Please read WP:YFA and WP:BLP. The new article will have to show that he is a notable musician by Wikipedia's definition. Note that photographs do not help to illustrate notability and I would suggest you ignore that aspect until the article is accepted. Mike Turnbull (talk) 11:33, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I see that there is an article about Saglietti in the Italian-language Wikipedia at it:Corrado Maria Saglietti but even there they say the sources are inadequate. Mike Turnbull (talk) 11:41, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Mike, thanks for your message! I have read notable musician Criteria for composers and lyricists: I think points 1-2-4-5-6 are satisfied. I would like to say the reason for submitting this draft: the works of the composer Corrado Maria Saglietti are very appreciated and performed above all outside Italy (60 different States between the US and the rest of the world). So apart from the satisfaction of being on an English Wkipedia page, I think finding a reference for this composer can be useful for those who do a search using Wikipedia from other countries and not from Italy. I have no problem writing the biography differently and using another photo and I can insert references to repertoire books citing works by C.M. Saglietti. If that's enough I'll send another draft, if not thank you anyway. Corrado — Preceding unsigned comment added by 79.51.171.121 (talk) 14:42, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Delete discussion[edit] I nominated a specific article for delete discussion. What are the next things that I can do??? How can I attract wiki uses attention to the delete discussion? And who will decide if the article can be kept or deleted?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:43, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Itcouldbepossible, and welcome to the Teahouse! The AfD has been listed at the appropriate categories to attract attention from other editors, so all you need to do now is wait for others to take a look and share their thoughts. After a week or so, if enough people comment, a consensus may form, and a closer, typically an admin, will evaluate the discussion and determine the consensus, if any. ––FormalDude talk 09:54, 16 November 2021 (UTC) FormalDude Ok thank you,for your suggestion. Also I want to know, how I can list delete discussions in appropriate XFD pages???Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:57, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @FormalDude, @Itcouldbepossible has already asked a question at the Teahouse, so I don't feel saying "welcome to the Teahouse!" is necessary. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:58, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I suggest, Itcouldbepossible, that you read up on when articles should be nominated for deletion before you make another nomination. -- Hoary (talk) 12:02, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Status of resubmission[edit] I added a citation to my article on Shmuel Goldin and resubmitted. Where do I check the status of this resubmission? Thanks. Lcurchack (talk) 09:46, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Lcurchack: Draft:Shmuel Goldin was unsubmitted, but I've now submitted it on your behalf. You can check the draft page anytime to view the status of the review. ––FormalDude talk 09:49, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Bot[edit] How can I create a bot, and help Wikipedia, in keeping vandalism out of sight?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:49, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: First have a look at the anti-vandalism tools that are already available. Then determine whether you are ready to be a bot operator. If you think you are, then thoroughly read through the bot requests for approval and discussions, and really think about whether you are ready to nominate yourself for this huge responsibility. There are many ways to fight vandalism, most of which don't require advanced privileges. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 10:04, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Page Statistics[edit] Once I had made the settings, but now I have forgotten it. I had turned it off for some reason. When I used to go to a specific page, it used to give me all the information about that specific page, like who created the page, when was it created, page visits, and more on the top of the page. But now I have forgotten how to make that setting again. Please tell me how to get back that setting. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:53, 16 November 2021 (UTC) That's XTools in the Gadgets panel. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 11:57, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Link to the german-language Wikipedia[edit] Please can you tell me, how can I set a link to the german-language Wikipedia? Thanks a lot.--Helmut Hoppenstedt (talk) 10:14, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Helmut Hoppenstedt, is Template:Interlanguage link what you're after? Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 10:24, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a lot, but only a part of the links to the german-language Wikipedia work as I want them to do.--Helmut Hoppenstedt (talk) 11:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Helmut Hoppenstedt: what do you want to do and what isn't working? ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 11:22, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I want to put some links to 24 articles in the german-language Wikipedia, which I wrote since 2015. All these links are on my Wikipedia-Homepage. These are all articles concerning german law.--Helmut Hoppenstedt (talk) 11:53, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Instead of {{ill|Beck-Blog|de| Beck-Blog}} you can just put the direct link de:Beck-Blog and so on. The reason the links are currently showing as red is, of course, because English Wikipedia doesn't have the corresponding articles, so the inter-language link only actually links from the [de] part. Mike Turnbull (talk) 12:01, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Ok, thank you very much, I try to do so.--Helmut Hoppenstedt (talk) 12:10, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Helmut Hoppenstedt@Michael D. Turnbull That is a feature, not a bug. Beck-Blog [de] shows that there is no en-WP article, like a normal redlink, and that there is a de-WP one. If an en-WP article is created, this automatically turns into a normal-looking WP-link. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 13:45, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I did as Mr. Turnbull told me to do and it worked. The other way, see the official side, didn´t work.--Helmut Hoppenstedt (talk) 13:51, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Movember[edit] Movember A very new editor is adding un-cited references to this page and writing in an informal tone. I'm not skilled enough to kindly directly them to stop. Can anyone more skilled give them some kind words? CT55555 (talk) 15:39, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @CT55555: Could you possibly tell us what user you are referring to and what their edits are? The most recent edits to the page appear constructive (except for the one referring to No Nut November which is unsourced but still constructive) so I don't see why they would need to be warned. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 15:43, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Blaze The Wolf: Indeed it's the one about "no nut november" which wasn't cited and also the explanation of what it meant didn't seem formal enough to me for Wikipedia. Likewise the next edit about video games isn't sourced. So both edits lack sources. In the context of it being new editor, I felt it would be appropriate to say that things need to have sources CT55555 (talk) 15:49, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @CT55555: The editor isn't necessarily all that new (their account is about 2 years old), however I think it would be best to mention it to them on their talk page in case they simply forgot to add a ref. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 16:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) To be honest, it's not just a matter of citations. I'm more concerned that the only link between No nut November and Movember is that someone who wanted to go viral decided the best way was to hijack a widely popular movement and pick a name that looked like Movember, even though there is no other common factor between them. No nut has nothing to do with men's health or moustaches. There are a couple of other links there that seem decidedly irrelevant too. What's with play-off beards? Is this going to be a repository of random links to anything that mentions facial hair? Elemimele (talk) 19:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Question from K5gproWiki (15:59, 16 November 2021)[edit] anyone pls teach me how to make professional stuff K5gproWiki (talk) 15:59, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Added heading. Rotideypoc41352 (talk · contribs) 16:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia editors are volunteers, i.e., not paid. As to how to get better at editing, see links at Help:Introduction. David notMD (talk) 17:04, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, K5gproWiki. If you're asking about editing Wikipedia, please see my reply to #Hi above; if you're talking about something else, then I'm afraid that this is not a place that can help you, as this page is only for questions about using and editing Wikipedia. --ColinFine (talk) 17:07, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Capital punishment in the Bible[edit] i am a professor of Hebrew Bible/ Old Testament at Duke. how can i go about editing this page, correcting many of the deficiencies noted? marc brettler — Preceding unsigned comment added by 152.3.43.54 (talk) 16:02, 16 November 2021 (UTC) You may make an edit request(click for instructions) detailing changes you feel are needed, on the article talk page, Talk:Capital punishment in the Bible. 331dot (talk) 16:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Alternatively, you could create an account (there is no need to use your real name) and when it is autoconfirmed you'll be able to edit the article directly. It is protected from direct access by IP-only accounts because it suffers from so much vandalism. Whether you edit directly or via an edit request, please be sure to supply reliable sources for any change. However expert you are, we do not allow original research in Wikipedia. Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:14, 16 November 2021 (UTC) The artice is currently under protection (WP:SEMI) but that expires in a couple of days. WP:TUTORIAL and WP:EXPERT can be of help to you. Also: PLEASE improve that article. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 16:53, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Click on Talk (upper left) to see if some of what you have in mind has been subject of past or current debate. David notMD (talk) 17:06, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Funk art[edit]  Jack Leissring (talk) 16:18, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Jack Leissring Hello and welcome. Do you have a question about the funk art article? 331dot (talk) 16:19, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I suspect he is wondering why Fyrael reverted some of his recent additions. According the message placed on his Talk Page, Fyrael suspected the additions were self-promotional. As I'm not an expert in the topic, I don't know whether WP:SELFCITE applies. Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:24, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Fyrael is willing to discuss the edits with you, however you have not responded to their comments on the talk page. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 16:28, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Citations[edit] I was reading WP:Cite and I realized it said parenthetical citations were depreciated in Sep. last year and the article I’m working on, Woody (Toy Story), might have parenthetical citations. For example one of the citations is Price 2008, p. 126 is that considered a parenthetical citation or a short citation? If it isn’t how can you tell the difference between them? Kaleeb18 (talk) 17:16, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Kaleeb18: The section of WP:CITE that you're referring to says that what's deprecated is "short citations in parentheses placed within the article text itself, such as (Smith 2010, p. 1). This does not affect short citations that use <ref> tags, which are not inline parenthetical references." So, no, the short citations in the Woody article aren't what's deprecated; they would have to be changed only if they had been inserted in parentheses in the article text itself, rather than as footnotes. Deor (talk) 18:16, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Deor: Oh Thank you, that makes a lot more sense now. Kaleeb18 (talk) 19:18, 16 November 2021 (UTC) How to give warnings with Twinkle tags[edit] I asked this question to the editor, who gave me welcome message, but he is not answering it. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_talk:HiLo48#Tag_Twinkle --ZebraaaLounge (talk) 18:13, 16 November 2021 (UTC) ZebraaaLounge (talk) 18:13, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @ZebraaaLounge: Those are given with the tool called Twinkle, however I recommend you don't use it until you've gained a bit more experience and you resolve the edit war you are currently engaged in. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 18:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @ZebraaaLounge: it is absolutely unacceptable for you to falsify another user's signature, as you did in this edit. I don't know what you were trying to do, but please do not ever do that again. CodeTalker (talk) 19:38, 16 November 2021 (UTC) CodeTalker, Where did I falsify their signature. Wikipedia was having lots of page loading, problem, and server error. I wrote their names instead of pinging them. I was replying to one user mentioning another user's name. And in the whole edit, only my signature has links to my user page, talkpage. They are obviously watching their last edits, and that's why I did not ping them at that time.ZebraaaLounge (talk) 02:17, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I checked again and saw I ended the comment with my signature only. And page history will show who made what edit. ZebraaaLounge (talk) 02:31, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @ZebraaaLounge: I think you messed up with that edit. If you look what happened in the diff, not only did you add a comment of your own, correctly signed, but you also changed someone else's signature from a comment 4 paragraphs higher so that it read [[User:NarSakSasLee|Echo1Charlie]] instead of [[User:NarSakSasLee|NarSakSasLee]]. This would have presented the text Echo1Charlie (while linking to NarSakSasLee, who actually wrote the paragraph so signed). You can see how this would create a very bad impression, as it looks as though you are trying to put NarSakSasLee's words in Echo1Charlie's mouth. Best avoided! Elemimele (talk) 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Elemimele: @CodeTalker: I understand what happened now. Their names NarSakSasLee are uncommon words, jumbled letters, so not easy to spell. I was copy-pasting their names to write my own comment. Instead I copy-pasted another's name in other's signature. Their signature has spelling. Bbb23 name is easy to remember. ZebraaaLounge (talk) 07:06, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Difficulty understanding Wiki's definition of notability[edit] Hello, I can't seem to understand what significant coverage means for a Wiki article to go up. I used references that are not biased and that show significant coverage about the subject. Could someone help me? Ernestoche0 (talk) 18:58, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Ernestoche0: WP:GNG says that sources should show "significant coverage in reliable sources that are independent of the subject." To be independent, a source must not have been created with the help of the subject, which means that self-written pieces or interviews are not okay (that's refs number 1, 2 3, 6, 7, 8; also see WP:PRIMARYSOURCE). The rest don't show significant coverage because they're mostly trivial mentions of Miller within the context of his company. Those sources could potentially be used to write an article about the company instead. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 20:27, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Como editar uma página da wikipedia[edit]  Anapaulacosta71 (talk) 19:19, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Google's Translation from Portuguese: How to edit a wikipedia page? ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 19:25, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Bom dia, Anapaulacosta71. See Help:Introduction - unfortunately there doesn't seem to be an equivalent in Portuguese, but if you find Spanish easier to read than English, then try es:Ayuda:Introducción. --ColinFine (talk) 22:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Repeated non-acceptance of a Wiki Page Need A Reviewer who is Knowledgable about Gospel Music[edit] Hi, we've had the page submission denied twice for 'Vicki Mack Lataillade', "You indicate that the articles references only mention Vicki in "passing". How knowledgeable are you in the Gospel Industry? I think there should be a more knowledgeable reviewer. Vicki is a huge force in the gospel industry her record label GospoCentric records already has a wiki page. Leonzaigirdar (talk) 20:39, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I know nothing about gospel music but you have used a number of press releases, these are not considered reliable or independent, so will need replacing. Theroadislong (talk) 20:44, 16 November 2021 (UTC) They would likely tell you the same thing. You cannot use the existence, absence, or condition of another (tangentially-related) article to argue for yours. If your sources don't discuss her at length, are not editorially independent of her, or have no professional editorial control, then the article is going to be declined. We will NOT budge on this in the slightest. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 20:48, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Please also note that undisclosed paid advocacy is prohibited by our policies on neutral point of view and what Wikipedia is not, and is an especially serious type of conflict of interest. Theroadislong (talk) 20:52, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Adding a footnote citation to top of a Wikipedia entry that already has other footnote citations[edit] Not sure how to add a new citation to the top of a Wikipedia piece I created in the sandbox so it shows up as a footnote citation at the end of the article. I previously used the Reflist template for other references on this piece. Is there an easy way to do this? JhallCORE (talk) 20:53, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @JhallCORE: I'm confused as to what you're trying to achieve. Footnotes will show up wherever {{reflist}} is, and we always put that at the end of the article under a header titled "References". Could you elaborate on what you're trying to do and why? ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 21:16, 16 November 2021 (UTC) The first (newly added) citation needs to start with <ref>, not </ref>. It is currently appearing in the lead of the article rather than the References section. 173.49.228.131 (talk) 21:46, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Popularity of any one particular article[edit] Hi all! So I edit all over the place, and have even taken a recent interest in helping to revert vandalism and other good things I can get myself into. Wikipedia has proven to be my "stress outlet"... believe it or not. . On to my question... I was curious if there is any tool to tell the "page views" or "popularity" of any ONE particular specific article. Lets take Philadelphia as a random one I've done some work with in the past. I'd like to know what gets more visitation and less visitation so that I can understand if my efforts are being viewed by 1 person, 100 people, or 1,000 or some other random number in between (on a daily, weekly, or annual basis, makes no real difference). I am no technical expert, so my only gauge for these sorts of things is to use amazon's Alexa chrome extension which tells me that 80 million people visit the MAIN wiki page each day, but that does me no good for knowing the popularity/visitation of the specific pages that I've worked on and contributed to. Thanks for humoring my random question of the day! Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 21:02, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Th78blue: Hello Th! You can see the amount of times a page is viewed at pageviews.toolforge.org and all you have to do is type in the name of the page. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 21:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Th78blue Welcome to the Teahouse. Seeing how your contributions have been viewed by others is a great way of getting feedback for all one's efforts. Blaze was typically brief in their reply. So here's a bit more help for you: One good route to the link your were given is simply to click the View History tab of any article, then look for the Page Views link towards the top of the page. That takes you to the toolforge link that Blaze mentioned (see here). But you can add more than one article to that page and compare the difference in views that they get, and also change the time period displayed. By looking at your user 5,222 contributions to date (see here), I can see your a couple of your other most-edited pages, and can add these to the pageview tool. So, here is a set of your most edited articles, totalling 3/4 million page views over a 5 month period. Pretty impressive to know that even a tiny addition has been viewed so many times. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:09, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Question regarding copyright[edit] Hello! So I have a bit of an odd question regarding copyright. Now this is all theoretical (except for the image as the image does exist) but, say I have an image of a character that an artist made for me and they told me that I can use the image as much as I want as long as I give them credit and I want to use the image of Wikipedia. Would that count as being public domain or would that be some other type of copyright? As I said it's purely theoretical as, although the image I'm talking about does exist, I have no plans on using it on Wikipedia for the time being. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 21:10, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Blaze The Wolf: try WP:MCQ, that's where the experts for this stuff are. Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 21:22, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Will do! ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 21:24, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Dear whoever is going to read this.[edit] I'm trying to make a wikipedia article for my teacher, most of the information was actually collected from the man himself so it can be hard to find ways to site it. Yet I still tried my best and managed to get around 5 websites. I would very much appreciate it if the article could be accepted for around a week or even just a few days to show it to him. I understand if this is not possible but instead could you teach me how to make my article acceptable instead since I am still new here. Thank you for your time. Riverbank333 (talk) 22:21, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Riverbank333 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Wikipedia is not a place to memorialize or honor someone. Wikipedia articles summarize what independent reliable sources say about a person that meets Wikipedia's special definition of a notable person. Wikipedia does not summarize what people say about themselves. There are other websites in a wiki style with much less stringent inclusion requirements if you just want to post something on the internet about your teacher. 331dot (talk) 22:30, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I understand, thank you for responding and have a good day. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Riverbank333 (talk • contribs) 22:35, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Is there a place that's not as drastic as AfD for getting a second opinion on an article?[edit] I've been looking at Stephen_Jolly_(academic). I really don't know what to think. The article certainly looks as though he's super-important, and a quick Google-search turns up a lot more similar stuff, about how he's widely considered to be the most important commentator on things military ever to have existed. But currently all the references in his article here, bar one, are alumni/staff entries from institutions where he works/has-worked, and his LinkedIn profile. There's nothing independent to speak of. The article feels very promotional: stuff about serving two distinguished vice chancellors. I'm seeing one named fellowship, but otherwise just a lot of academic seat-hopping and popping up in think-tanks. The article has a lot of external links embedded in the text (to his start-up company, to his employer). And it also lists a publication that hasn't yet been published. The article has been written by one IP editor and one other editor, the other editor having only edited Stephen Jolly and the Barony_of_Stobo whose current holder is " The Much Hon. William Jolly", where William Jolly actually links to Stephen Jolly, sort-of suggesting this might all be a bit of an in-house edit-job. I don't feel confident to drag this to AfD because military commentary is not my area of expertise, and I think he might be terribly important. But I also get the heebie-jeebies from this article that it could also have a lot wrong with it. Is there a way to get a 2nd opinion? Elemimele (talk) 22:41, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Elemimele (talk) 22:41, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Elemimele: You might consider starting a discussion over at Wikipedia:WikiProject Military history, where they have more experience with these types of articles. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 22:51, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Timtempleton: thanks, I'll give it a try. Elemimele (talk) 06:42, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Ingleside (Amelia Courthouse, Virginia)[edit] This particular historic landmark is in the utter boondocks, easily a dozen miles on narrow, twisting country roads away from the post office that serves its address (and from the court house). To add to the potential for confusion, the farms directly across the lane are served by a different PO, also miles away on back roads. The title of the article is technically correct, but it's quite misleading for anyone not familiar with the area, and not the way local residents would refer to the spot either. In any case: Traditional and still-preferred rendering for the seat of Amelia County is "Amelia Court House", not "Courthouse". I suggest that the title be changed to Ingleside (Amelia County, Virginia). I would change it myself, but I hope it's acceptable that I'd rather not set up my own account, for a variety of reasons. 2603:6081:8004:DD5:497E:E054:AD55:9B4E (talk) 22:43, 16 November 2021 (UTC) It's unlikely that anyone volunteering at the Teahouse will be familiar with this building. Even so, we need reliable sources, not hearsay. You might start a discussion on the article talk page and ping the creator and others who have edited this in the past. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 22:47, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Welcome to the Teahouse, IP editor. You might have a point, but it's very hard to tell from the dead citation links. Personally, I'd fix those first and then propose it is named according to what the National register of Historic Places entries call it. If you think that's wrong, it's either a case for approaching the register managers to point out the error of the entry, or finding other sources which talk about it and presenting those as evidence of a better name. It took some searching, but I found this register link which doesn't mention any use as a courthouse, nor in the additional supporting PDF. So I think you're on strong ground, and a bit of more research by someone could be helpful. (I'll add the link to the talk page for someone to insert). If you happen to work in a field related to historic buildings, you're not barred from editing the article, though it could be helpful to note in any edit you make that you're connected in some way. See WP:COI for more help on this. Regards from the UK, Nick Moyes (talk) 23:41, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I've now left a note about these issues on the article talk page. See Talk:Ingleside (Amelia Courthouse, Virginia). Nick Moyes (talk) 23:50, 16 November 2021 (UTC) The Future of Wikipedia[edit] Firstly, thank you for the invitation. Due to Wikipedia relying solely on Donations - would it be a possibility that Wikipedia would ever close? I have donated and will donate to WikiMedia, but I think a fundraising option would be great, to advertise Wikipedia's need for donations internationally in person, in the streets. Just a couple of thoughts, Best Regards, StrawberryFieldsChorley StrawberryFieldsChorley (talk) 23:57, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for your donations. Wikipedia needs donations, but I haven't heard that it's particularly pressed for money. So if you have more and are feeling magnanimous, consider one of the various alternatives. (Médecins Sans Frontières seems good.) -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @StrawberryFieldsChorley As Hoary says, 'thank you'. The Wikimedia Foundation actually raises a lot more money than is required simply to meet technical support and server costs, not to mention the 12GW/h of electricity needed to meet the demands of being one of the top most-visited websites in the world. Very large amounts of money are spent in educational and outreach work, especially in the less developed parts of the world where education and access to information is so needed. So, to answer your question as to whether any of the multiple language versions of Wikipedia would ever close, on a purely funding basis, I think the answer is "no". Though, were it ever to spend, year on year, more than it brings in annually, then it could find itself having to 'draw its horns in'. The people who have actually written the content in the 6.2million+ articles on English Wikipedia are all volunteers - just as they are in the myriad of other language projects. So rest assured that your donations never end up in the pockets of us editors. We do it all for the enjoyment and the satisfaction. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:34, 17 November 2021 (UTC) All that said, though, of course Wikipedia will end one day, as will everything humans have created. "Ever" is a very long time. DS (talk) 02:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Can't disagree with that one iota! Nick Moyes (talk) 21:40, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes is right. Given the fact that Wikipedia is the 13th most visited site in the world, and the largest encyclopedia in the history of the world by more than nearly triple the amount that the second largest has, the likelihood of Wikipedia or any other language variants closing is not very great. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 14:43, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Userpage[edit] Can I create a new userpage after an admin deleted my previous userpage? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Yes you may, unless of course you do so in a way that breaks some rule or other. Previously, you used your user page for drafting an article. You're not supposed to do that. (You're welcome to do it in your "sandbox".) So feel free to restart your user page, for informing others about yourself as an editor. -- Hoary (talk) 00:07, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, thank you. But I want to clarify something, I never use my userpage for a draft article, when did I do that? But I have a draft article in my sandbox, I actually requested to delete my own userpage, but thanks a lot.—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 00:33, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, sorry, Ctrlwiki: I must have misread something. The content of your userpage was indeed deleted at your request. -- Hoary (talk) 06:01, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Wikitampering: One chart, 52 weeks[edit] There may be other Wikipedia pages with this peculiar little bit of tampering but this is the first one I've found. Every one of the links at the bottom of the page listing the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play number ones of 2005 – https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Billboard_Hot_Dance_Club_Play_number_ones_of_2005 – goes to the Billboard chart for March 28, 2020. I'm afraid to look at the pages for 2004 and 2006! Thomps2020 (talk) 01:53, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: It looks like what used to be unique URLs for those dates are now just redirecting to Billboard's chart for March 2020. I think this is something that changed on Billboard's website, not on-wiki vandalism. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 01:59, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020 I'll echo what Claudine said - Doesn't look like any malicious intent, and the page history doesn't show any vandalism :). I'm updating that article's references right now with archive links, so hopefully nobody else will get confused! Either way, good eye catching that. ThadeusOfNazerethTalk to Me! 02:41, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you, Thadeus, for going to all that trouble. If someone from Billboard really did redirect all the links, why use a chart from March of 2020? Why not have the links go to the current week's chart? Not being in the "link redirecting" business, I have no idea. Thomps2020 (talk) 05:10, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Well, I just checked the links on the page of Hot Dance Club Play number-one singles of 1992.....and 1993.....and 1994.....and 1995 – and every link goes to that same chart of March 28, 2020. Yeah, Diana Ross' "Love Hangover 2020" was number one. We know! We know! Who redirected the links – and why? Is there any way to find out? Thomps2020 (talk) 05:37, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: You would probably have to ask Billboard. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:49, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: Chipping in here, it's because as it stands that chart from March 2020 is the most recent one (the Dance Club Play chart has been suspended since that date due to COVID). So they probably changed all the links and the no-longer-working link format redirects to the latest chart, which in this case is 18 months old. Hope that makes sense..... -- ChrisTheDude (talk) 12:31, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: Organizations and companies often rework their websites for a variety of reasons, and older content gets overwritten by more recent stuff or moved to some new url address as part of that process; so, when you click on the old link, you end up getting redirected to some other page. Sometimes you can find archived versions of the old webpages via sites like the Wayback Machine and this is what ThadeusOfNazereth has gone and done; so, everything should be fine now. You can do the same as well the next time you come across a similar problem if you want, or you can use templates {{Citations broken}} or {{Dead link}} to let others know about the problem. -- Marchjuly (talk) 06:45, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Cultural Appropriation Not Right!!! From an Indigenous Lens[edit] Hot tea for you Here's a hot sandwich, too, fresh from the press. I like Wikipedia...it gives a good base of knowledge. But...as I research topics attributed to Indigenous knowledge and healing, I come across people who are making their very well endowed non-Indigenous livelihood from the riches of Indigenous knowledge...this is not right! It annoys, irritates and frustrates me that they purport to be Indigenous Chiefs or Leaders or Businesses...and really it is their thirst for the almighty dollar that leads them...this is so rampant and so...blatantly there - that these "white-privileged" people can ride on the backs of us Indigenous people!! Arghhhhhh!!!!!! What can we do about this? What is the best way to call them out and effect a positive change? Dene Woman (talk) 04:27, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Dene Woman, welcome to the Teahouse. I know it's frustrating to see injustices on Wikipedia. Please enjoy some calming tea. Could you link to the Wikipedia articles that you're referring to, so that other editors can take a look? Some things to keep in mind are WP:RIGHTGREATWRONGS–Wikipedia is not a place to right great wrongs. If there is WP:BIAS in articles, that's something else, and we can address that. Maybe you could specify what your concerns with certain articles are exactly. ––FormalDude talk 04:36, 17 November 2021 (UTC) thanks the tea Formal Dude...ahhhh...just what I needed to cool down... so was researching https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chief_Phil_Lane_Jr. and then found this source http://www.newagefraud.org/smf/index.php?topic=2731.0 that's gives a different perspective perhaps it's possible to add the additional perspective? Cheers! — Preceding unsigned comment added by ::Dene Woman (talk • contribs) 05:28, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Dene Woman: The source you gave is an online forum, which is one of the most unreliable types of sources that exists, so it's not suitable for Wikipedia (see WP:UGC). Do you have any reliable sources that provide other points of view? ––FormalDude talk 06:13, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Regardless of appropriaton — MOS:HON suggests that honorifics such as "chief" should not be used in article titles. Maproom (talk) 09:07, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The article Chief Phil Lane Jr. dates to 2013, and has had many contributors. If there is a controversy about his ancestry/background/activities that could be added, but it would need reliable source references. David notMD (talk) 11:48, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Disclaimer: I have about zero knowledge of Native Americans (demography, history, culture etc.). This being said, I read the linked forum thread and I think there is a few intertwined questions here: Whether there should be an article about Phil Lane Jr. on Wikipedia. This asks whether that person is "notable" which in turn depends on the existence of reliable sources talking/writing about him at length; while I am not impressed by the current references (non-independent sources for the most it seems), I do not have the inclination to do the required check before thinking about nominating the article for deletion. Notice that one can be notable despite, or because, one is a fraudster. Whether Phil Lane Jr. can legitimately claim to be a Native; and whether he can legitimately claim to have some rank or status (chief? medicine man? I have no idea what those terms mean) within the relevant NA community. That is not a question for Wikipedia editors; however, if there is a sourced consensus within the relevant community that he should/should not be called "chief" or whatever, this ought to be in the article. Conversely, he should not be called a "chief" or anything else without a reliable source, and "chief" should probably not be in the page title as Maproom indicated above. Whether Wikipedia should make claims pertaining to what medical practices Phil Lane supports and/or sells. For any medical claims, the heightened standard of WP:MEDRS should be followed (which likely kills 99% of medical knowledge alleged to stem from Native American practice). For claims about historical authenticity, we should still use reliable sources, which definitely excludes people trying to sell such practices (see the so-called "Tibetan singing bowls" in our article Standing bell for an example of modern fabrication). Whether Wikipedia should "call out", or otherwise take action against Phil Lane, whether as retaliation for having had a misleading/glowing article for years, or to do justice to Native Americans. Most definitely not. Even if the wrongness of one individual could be clearly established (which does not seem clear to me here), we are not in that business. Finally, what sources would be acceptable for topics pertaining to Native Americans. The potential problem is that if a fraudster is an expert at playing the Western/Anglo-Saxon media, it is easy to have "reliable sources" putting them down as a chief or writing other stuff, which would be rejected by a clear consensus within the oral tradition culture of which the fraudster claims to originate. (I count forum posts as "oral tradition" here since they are rejected as unreliable all the same). That question goes well beyond this instance, and it is hard to see what a proper fix would be. (See also Wikipedia:Systemic_bias#Availability_of_sources_may_cause_bias even though the case of oral tradition is not mentioned specifically there.) TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 16:33, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Regarding to biography page[edit] Hi, I have created a biography article of a Zyple Owner "Shanmugam Vaithiyalingam". But the page has been deleted from Wikipedia team. Please help me how can we publish again. Best Regards Zyple team ShanmugamVaithiyalingam (talk) 05:18, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @ShanmugamVaithiyalingam: The comments on your talk page tell you why this draft article was deleted, namely that Wikipedia is no place for autobiography or promotion or advertising. A Wikipedia article can be created for a person who is notable, that is, if they have received significant coverage in multiple published secondary sources that are reliable, intellectually independent of each other, and independent of the subject. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:41, 17 November 2021 (UTC) hlep me in publishing new article on laxminiya Youth club[edit] Dear sir/mam, I want to publish a new page on wikipedia. An NGO called Laxminiya Youth Club situated in Morang District of Nepal in 2018 AD is not listed in Wiki page. So i request the team to help us in publishing the page. Niteshshah24 (talk) 06:40, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Niteshshah24, and welcome to the Teahouse. The question is whether the youth club meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability: roughly, have several people, unconnected with the club, chosen to write about it in some depth in reliably published sources? For most youth clubs, the answer is, No, and so no article about them is possible. If the club does meet the criteria, then it is possible that there could be an article about it; but the next problem is getting such an article written. There is no "team": there are thousands and thousands of volunteer editors, who work on what they choose. In theory, you could make a request at requested articles; but in practice, the likelihood of an editor picking the request up is small. It is possible that if you posted at WT:WikiProject Nepal there might be somebody interested in working with you; but no guarantees. Your best chance of getting an article written (assuming the club is notable in Wikipedia's sense) is to write it yourself. But writing an article is much harder than it looks, and I always advise new editors who are thinking of creating an article to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" of editing Wikipedia, by working on improving some of our six million articles. Finally, I need to point out that if you have any connection with the youth club, then you have a conflict of interest: this doesn't forbid you from writing an article about it, but it makes it even harder, as you are likely to find it difficult to write in a neutral way. (Remember that Wikipedia is basically not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say, but only in what unconnected people have chosen to publish about it). If you are in any sort of paid role in connection with the club, then you must make formal declarations as a paid editor. To summarise - if you have come here to help build Wikipedia, you are welcome. If you have come here to tell the world about your youth club, you are better off doing it somewhere else than Wikipedia. --ColinFine (talk) 10:17, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Shyam Sunder Jyani[edit] FYI?– Removed leading spaces – ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) Hello there, I am new with Wikipedia community. When I made first edit on a Wikipedia article, I was on cloud nine. After that, I made few other minor changes. I submitted an article to publish. The page url is https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Shyam_Sunder_Jyani . Unfortunately, it has not been accepted and declined. The person whom I wrote article has a significant coverage on print media, online media and with few Govt. official websites. Could you guide me how should I provide accurate and reliable information so that if it get approved if it meets with wikipedia guidelines? I also want to learn best practices of wikipedia. Best, Jakhar Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:52, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: The links in the decline message tell you what you need to do to show that the subject of this article is notable – provide reliable, independent, secondary sources, and cite them using Wikipedia's referencing methods. Verifiability tells you why it's important to add sources to articles and how you can identify reliable sources. Your first source, a faculty profile from the professor's college, would probably be considered a self-published source, and besides, it doesn't say why he is notable. I am not certain whether India Today would be considered reliable (see discussion at § India Today or IndiaToday.com) but even if it is, you would need more than one good source. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) FYI?– Fixed indentation per WP:THREAD – ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) Thank you ClaudineChionh so much for your prompt response and teaching me about reliable sources. Yes, there are few reliable sources are available. Below are the few sources where about him and his initiative is covered in this year. Could you help me out if these are the reliable source? https://www.unccd.int/actionsland-life-programme/land-life-award-2021-healthy-land-healthy-livesBe https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/rajasthan-women-vow-to-nurture-green-family/article34862254.ece https://www.dw.com/en/familial-forestry-in-india-caring-for-trees-like-theyre-family/a-59215321 https://www.unccd.int/news-events/2021-land-life-award-winner-familial-forestry https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CgYwtwGedxg Thank you and I patiently waiting for your further guidance. Jakhar Singh — Preceding unsigned comment added by Jakhar Singh (talk • contribs) 09:35, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Please keep replies threaded by indenting your reply with a colon at the start, and sign your reply adding four tildes (~~~~) at the end. You can enable the Discussion Tools beta feature to indent and sign your replies automatically on talk pages – look for this in Preferences. As to your sources: WP:RSP is a good place to start looking for discussions and consensus on the reliability of many sources. The Hindu: generally yes Deutsche Welle (DW): It's not in the table but archived discussions suggest yes United Nations agencies: It depends on the topic and the agency (see discussion at § Is the United Nations a Reliable Source?) – specific sources should be discussed on the article/draft talk page. YouTube: usually no — Preceding unsigned comment added by ClaudineChionh (talk • contribs) 10:12, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you ClaudineChionh for teaching me. I will look for the sources you suggested. For a new article, Would it be good if just brief about the object in few lines (e.g. 3-5 lines) so it can be approved easily and then subsequent edits can be made? The article which I am writing, he is a Govt. college Professor and apart from his teaching job, he works for environment and society so could I use the phrases like environmentalist and social worker? Could you teach me what needs to keep in mind while writing a first article for best practices? Best Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:38, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Every fact or descriptive phrase you use must be supported by reliable sources. You can read about the steps to create an article, though as I am not an article reviewer, I am not the best person to ask for advice on this process. You are strongly advised to read your first article as well, and it's also a very good idea to spend some time on other tasks here before creating a new article, which is one of the more difficult tasks in Wikipedia. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Experimenting With Country Data Templates[edit] I apologize if this was the wrong place to ask this question, but I did not know where else to ask. So, you know how there are sandboxes for users to experiment? What if I wanted to experiment with Country Data templates? Like, say I wanted to change the flag that would show up for a country when using the flag template(s) (Just as an experiment, not a permanent change to the actual template page). Is there a way to go about doing that, and if so, how would I go about doing that? Karl Malone the Mailman (talk) 07:41, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Karl Malone the Mailman, you might find useful information at Help:Template. --ColinFine (talk) 10:21, 17 November 2021 (UTC) You would use the Sandbox associated to the template. Any changes made would be reflected in the testcases page for that template. - X201 (talk) 10:34, 17 November 2021 (UTC) BPL[edit] How can I find BLP articles that does not have a talk page. I want to create a talk page for them. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:18, 17 November 2021 (UTC) You probably don't need to! The idea of talk pages isn't to talk about the subject of the page (i.e. the talk page for Boris_Johnson isn't there so people can express their views on Johnson, his politics and life). Talk pages are there only as a venue for editors to discuss changes to the article. You will see that Boris Johnson's talk page is a mish-mash of discussions of protection against vandalism, whether to capitalise Prime Minister, complaints about unreferenced text, and discussions about whether certain events should be mentioned in the associated article or not. This is quite typical. So there's no point in having a talk page until a couple of editors have something to talk about - at which point it will be created automatically, as soon as the first editor decides to post to it. Elemimele (talk) 11:35, 17 November 2021 (UTC) new round of discussions regarding the controversy section in the "Our Lady of Fátima" page[edit] I have started a new round of discussions with Spyrazzle regarding the controversy section in the "Our Lady of Fátima" page i hope senior editors will keep an eye on the talk page arbitrate fairly between us, the last time i was banned unfairly for 36 hours by herecomesjamie for adding material not sourced, which is ironic because in fact i did source the material i added and it is the same exact sources Spyrazzle used to build his controversy section, if they were good to build the section why are they not good for a rebutel? anyways please help keep this fair and professional, Thank you all — Preceding unsigned comment added by Fadi153 (talk • contribs) 10:01, 17 November 2021 (UTC)  Courtesy link: Our Lady of Fátima ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 10:15, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Fadil53. Dispute resolution explains the steps you should follow to try to resolve disputes. These steps do not include posting repeatedly at the Teahouse. --ColinFine (talk) 10:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Repinging Fadi153 --ColinFine (talk) 10:23, 17 November 2021 (UTC) If you cannot resolve the dispute through discussion with the other editor, you may request participation from uninvolved, interested editors to build consensus for your changes. Several venues are available, listed below, to find editors who may be able to assist. Participation in dispute resolution is voluntary and no one is required to participate. However, discussion can still proceed and consensus may be reached without the non-participating editor's input. Administrators and the community may take into consideration the degree and nature of an editor's participation in dispute resolution when deciding if an editor's activities are productive. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Fadi153 (talk • contribs) 11:43, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Fadi153: That text is a quote from the Dispute resolution page, and I'm not quite sure how it is relevant. The Teahouse is not one of the "several venues" listed on the page. Starting one Teahouse discussion about the article, to get advice on the situation, would have been fine, but this is the fourth thread started by one or another of the editors involved in the dispute. What you need to do is discuss the topic and the sourcing, but not the other editor(s) or their beliefs, on the article talk page. This is done to arrive at a consensus about the article content. If you don't get a consensus (either for or against what you, personally, think is the "right" version), the various options for dispute resolution are outlined on the page Colin Fine linked. Previous Teahouse threads about the article Our Lady of Fátima over the past few weeks: here, here, here, and this thread. --bonadea contributions talk 13:04, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy fact: the admin who blocked Fadi153 was actually Ohnoitsjamie, not "herecomesjamie". Bishonen | tålk 19:55, 17 November 2021 (UTC). Follow-up to How to write about a "Group of companies" in wikipedia[edit] How to write about a company in wikipedia. Marytwist (talk) 10:46, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Marytwist: Is there already an article about the company on Wikipedia? If so, you can usually edit the article, but make sure you understand the basic rules of Wikipedia, including the conflict of interest rules, if they apply to you. If the article doesn't already exist, does the company meet the criteria for notability? If so, then see the advice on writing your first article. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 11:03, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The archive link already has general advice. Do you now have a specific question and, if so, please tell us which draft or article you are referring to? Most of your actual additions to Wikipedia articles so far have been reverted. Please read carefully the links supplied above. Mike Turnbull (talk) 11:26, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Problems with submission[edit] Goodmorning, I wrote an article about Microwave Barriers & Sensors (here there is the link to the page https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Bistatic_Microwave_barrier) and was rejected because it "reads more like an advertisement than an entry in an encyclopedia" and it doesn't express a neutral point of view. I am writing here to ask to someone more expert than me, if could please help me understanding this problem and what I need to change: as sources I used official papers and documents from National Institutes and Departments and I have no connections to it, so from my point of view I believed the article is supported by reliable references and sources. Could an editor have a look at it and help me finding any outstanding issues that should be resolved? Thanks in advance for your time and suppor Annaas98 (talk) 10:47, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Welcome to the Teahouse, Annaas98. There are some significant problems here. The first is that from reading the introduction, I have no idea what your draft article is actually about. It might be helpful for you to read MOS:LEADSENTENCE. I also see lots of sentences that aren't supported with references, and recommendations (such as "For a better and more reliable detection the zone should be free of obstructions, bushes, and the grass should be kept cut. It is recommended to use a gravel surface since water is better drained than in the grass."), which don't belong in a Wikipedia article, per WP:NOTGUIDE. Cordless Larry (talk) 11:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) For another concrete example, the very first sentence of that draft (as of now) is The anti-intrusion systems based on microwave are the most reliable. That is absolutely not a sentence that should be anywhere in the article, let alone the introduction, let alone unsupported by any reference whatsoever. Would you imagine the sentence "X was the most patriotic of US presidents" in a biography of a politician? No, because "patriotic" (like "reliable") is quite a vague word; and further, such a statement would need to either be supported by the consensus of reliable sources (unlikely) or attributed ("according to their vice-president, X was the most patriotic president"). TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 13:57, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Image size[edit] Hello. How can I size an image in percentage? I want to size an image 100%. Thank you. Richard M William (talk) 11:24, 17 November 2021 (UTC) See H:PICTURE for the general guide on images. Make sure you preview the page you are editing before saving/publishing it, so the effect is as you intended. If you still have problems, repost here with a link to the page and image filename you are working with, Richard M William. Mike Turnbull (talk) 11:31, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Question about Draft:Ezekiel Clark[edit] Can someone take me on a step-to-step guide on fixing the problem for Draft:Ezekiel Clark and Draft:Jelle Sels? I just want to make sure my article is accepted, with all the problems fixed. (Both are declined, of course) Also, the article I submitted did not qualify for an article.  Severestorm28 (talk) 12:19, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Severestorm28: welcome to the Teahouse. Both drafts are about tennis players, and both of them were declined for not showing that the person is notable, as Wikipedia defines notability. A person is considered to be notable, in general, if there is significant coverage of them, that is, if multiple reliable, secondary sources independent of the person have written about them (not simply mentioned their names, but written in some detail). Tennis players may also be considered notable if they meet the criteria that are outlined here. In both Draft:Ezekiel Clark and Draft:Jelle Sels, the only sources are their pages on results/rankings websites, which means that you have not showed that there is significant coverage about either of them. Unless they meet the criteria for tennis players, it is very unlikely that they are notable. That is not a problem that can be fixeed, I'm afraid. More information here about notability for tennis players. Regards, --bonadea contributions talk 12:41, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Bonadea: If so, then how did my Draft:Brandon Holt get published? I don't get the differences for each draft I wrote. Severestorm28 (talk) 13:29, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I think the best person to discuss that with would be Greenman, the reviewer who accepted the draft, on their user talk page. Maybe the draft about Holt simply showed more clearly that he is notable – I don't know very much about the special notability requirements for tennis players, that's why I linked them above instead of trying to summarise them. Regards, --bonadea contributions talk 13:48, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Bonadea: Thanks for your responses. This is very useful, and will solve my problem. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:59, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Shortcut Button for reply[edit] It is very disgusting to reply to long conversations, by using edit source. I have heard that there is a button beside the last reply labelled as'reply', and on clicking that one can easily add the reply. Please tell me to make that setting. And thanks again, for answering so many of my questions. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Wow, "disgusting" is a rather strong word! But I think what you're looking for is Discussion Tools, in Preferences > Beta features. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 13:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionhThanks a lot, you helped me a lot. Yes 'disgusting' is a bad word, I know, but it sometimes gets irritating when I have to scroll all done the edit source section and then add equivalent (:::::) and then write what I want to do. By using that beta feature, I can easily reply. Any suggestions on auto signing, I sometimes tend to forget to sign. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:14, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Discussion Tools will also sign your replies automatically. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Teahouse Archive[edit] Some hours ago, a bot came on my talk page and told me that one of my question had been archived. I see that there are many archives in Teahouse. I am in need of the conversation I had in that question, but I cannot find it. Please tell me a way, to find archived questions in Teahouse. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:24, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Below the Table of Contents box is a list of the most recent archives, and a search box. If you type your username in that box, it should find all discussions you have been involved in (unless you forgot to sign!) --bonadea contributions talk 13:37, 17 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Itcouldbepossible, there isn't a way to continue a discussion that's already been archived, but you can continue the discussion again by making another post here. Remember to link to the post so we know what you are referring to; you can do so with this special hyperlink below: [[Wikipedia:Teahouse/Questions/Archive (X)#(Name of header)|link]] I do believe I found your question though. It's helpful to know when searching that archived questions are most likely in the most recent number or the one before it. If not, you can search for the name of your questions in the "Search Archives" box: Wikipedia:Teahouse/Questions/Archive 1131#Edits Panini!? 13:43, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Actually, the bot notification includes a link to the archive and precise section. The most recent such notification for the OP points to Wikipedia:Teahouse/Questions/Archive_1130#Reliable_Sources. The fact that the OP read the archival notice but failed to see the link makes me think that the notification template is defective; I will ask for feedback at their talk page. TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 14:06, 17 November 2021 (UTC) In the notification from the bot, it said "You can still find the archived discussion here"; in that sentence, the word "here" is in blue, indicating that it is a wikilink to the thread in question. --David Biddulph (talk) 15:19, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph When a link is piped to a short word, "here", it is quite easy to miss, I believe it could be improved by piping the phrase "archived discussion here" just like you did with "notification from the bot". Roger (Dodger67) (talk) 16:34, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Notability of Troom Troom[edit] Is Troom Troom notable? I'm wondering if it is or not. I've previously been told my article does not have enough sources, but also that Troom Troom could potentially warrant an article. It definitely impacts the culture of YouTube, reacting to content in a similar vein has been a trend on the platform for quite some time now. Could anybody who has heard of Troom Troom give their input? Thanks. KawaiiManiac (talk) 13:58, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The general consensus for YouTube content creators seems to be "no". Please read WP:NYOUTUBE and you'll see why. There may be exceptions but the challenge will be to meet the notability guidelines. Mike Turnbull (talk) 14:54, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Article for Creation: Van Romaine[edit]  Courtesy link: Draft:Van Romaine I have been working on and editing an article for creation on the subject, Van Romaine. The original author's submittals, and now mine as well, focus pretty clearly on notability as the primary reason for rejecting the work. The article is biographical of a living person, and I do understand and appreciate the higher standards applied per Wikipedia's Notability article. I am both frustrated and confused, for a few reasons. I hope someone can address my questions in regard. First of all (and perhaps a bit ashamedly, as it seems somewhat juvenile), I have reviewed many published articles, under the same category (drummers) that have either dubious references, minimal references, or the same reference sites that I cited in my article. I am struggling to understand how some articles are accepted with so little substance, while my efforts are being denied. Is there any value to be gained by noting the articles I found that have these inferior references? Secondly, because the subject is of an age where the available references themselves are in a transitional phase; many having been originally published in print and archives online may not be available, and access to hard copies may be inaccessible due to cost, how should I proceed? Is it my obligation to spend money for access to reference material that may not even be accepted by the editing cadre? Thirdly, as the subject is a musician, his notoriety, impact and importance is subjective by nature. There are no metrics per se that define how or who is "worthy" of biography; other than the body of work that can attributed to the subject. We can not use words to define the unique styles, technical prowess or creative processes incorporated by an artist better than presenting available recordings, both in audio or video. All the words in the world can not do justice to describing a painting by Van Gogh; but one gaze (especially in person) transcends all that can not be described. In this subject case, there is a wealth of available audio and video of performances online. Does this trove carry no weight in establishing notability? Thanks in advance for your assistance and direction as to how I should re-examine this article. Terre Hominum (talk) 15:01, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Terre Hominum! You are asking questions that relate to the most fundamental principles of Wikipedia, so no doubt others will also want to address aspects of them. I'll try to get the ball rolling by responding to your points briefly. Firstly: a great many Wikipedia articles do not match up to current standards. Some were first created years ago when the standards were lower, others were created directly as articles without going through a Draft stage requiring independent review before becoming articles. Our essay sometimes referred to as WP:OTHERSTUFFEXISTS discusses why one should not rely on existing, possibly substandard articles to justify a similar one; where possible, only take as exemplars articles that have been rated as at least GA, if not FA. It is quite acceptable to flag up articles that you perceive as substandard, either by adding templates such as [citation needed] to unsubstantiated and contestible statements, by mentioning them to other editors, or by nominating them for deletion; however, the initial aim should usually be to improve articles (for example, by finding better references) rather than getting them expunged. Secondly: no, neither you nor anybody else are obliged to spend money, because this is a 100% volunteer project, but Wikipedia has a great many active editors, and no deadlines, so between them they can usually collaborate through Wikipedia Projects or other means to access most reference sources. Wikipedia is a collaborative project, and no praise accrues to an individual for having produced a new article solely by their own efforts. Thirdly: Notability is never measured by a subject's subjective "worth" or by the size and/or "quality" (who judges) of their body of work in itself, but almost solely by the extent to which reliable sources, independently of them, have published material of substantial length about them. For specific types of subject, there can be additional guidelines that lay down measurable metrics to aid assessment; those most applicable here can be found at Wikipedia:Notability (music). Hope this helps. {The poster formerly known as 87.81.230.195} 90.205.225.31 (talk) 15:47, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Terre Hominum To add a bit about notability in the sense that we mean it here. To use the example of Vincent van Gogh that you mentioned, he is not considered notable because of the brilliance of his paintings or the exquisiteness of his brush strokes. We have an article about him only because many people (who mostly never met him and were not even born when he cut off his ear) have written at great length and detail - enough to fill entire libraries - about him and his work. This is what we mean by independent and reliable sources. Now of course we don't expect every article subject to be the topic of whole libraries, but we do require that a few such sources do exist. Roger (Dodger67) (talk) 16:24, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Terre Hominum: I will add a few points to the other good responses above. First, brevity will aid your readers and correspondents, both in talk pages and in articles. In particular, breaking up your "wall of text" into separate paragraphs for each point would have made it much more readable. Who knows how many readers scrolled past your post because it looked too intimidating? Second, we unfortunately cannot (usually) cite or include audio recordings made by living musicians, both because they are primary sources and because we do not include copyrighted non-free content. But, third, many volunteers such as myself do have professional expertise in locating good secondary sources, and are willing to help locate or provide sources under fair-dealing conditions for the purpose of improving Wikipedia articles. Visit the resource exchange to learn more. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 22:33, 17 November 2021 (UTC) PLEAS HELP ME, i cant not publish my draft[edit]  Warnerbrok (talk) 16:03, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I have added the appropriate information to allow you to submit the draft for review. New users cannot directly create articles. 331dot (talk) 16:09, 17 November 2021 (UTC) But I do not believe that User:Warnerbrok/sandbox has any chance of being accepted at present, Warnerbrok, because most of the references do not meet the criteria of being reliable sources, independent of the subject, and having significant coverage of the subject: several of them do not mention him in any way. Please read WP:YFA carefully. Have you a connection with Cartier? If you have, you should declare your conflict of interest, and if you are in any way paid to create this article, or it is part of your job, then you must declare your status as a paid editor. Note that I have also tagged the image as not having a satisfactory source (the es-wiki article is emphatically not the source of the picture) and I am dubious whether it has been validly licensed. --ColinFine (talk) 17:29, 17 November 2021 (UTC) How to create click to drop down segments of an article?[edit] I would like to know how to create one of those click-to-drop-down aspects of an article? I would like to make this page (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sharksploitation) more accessible. People can choose to view the films by release order or alphabetical order or alphabetical for the first film with it's sequels below it. As it is now I need to use Ctrl-f to find what I am looking for Simdude1990 (talk) 16:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Do you mean a sortable table? Help:Table has a lot of information about how to create and format tables. Or do you mean "collapsed" content, where you can hide or show part of the content on a page? That's usually not recommended for articles – there is some information about it here. --bonadea contributions talk 16:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990: – I didn't manage to ping you the first time... --bonadea contributions talk 16:32, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I mean the collapsed segments. I am thinking something like the following Films in Alphabetical order (collapsed) Films in Alphabetical and Sequel order (collapsed) Films by Genre/type (collapsed) Films in release order (standard article, non-collapsible) - Although I will probably invert the list and separate it by year (or group of years eg 1980-1985, 2000's etc.)--Simdude1990 (talk) 16:44, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990: Welcome to the Teahouse. Like Bonadea said, collapsible content generally shouldn't be collapsed per the Manual of Style. Perhaps sortable tables would work better for you? —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 19:55, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990 Firstly, there genuinely isn't enough content in that page to warrant any collapsing/hiding; I can't imagine why on earth you'd think there is? I do, however, agree with @Tenryuu, and feel that a sortable table would allow users to sort these films by year or by title, or by anything else you felt inclined to add. But that would only merit being collapsible were there some other content worthy of bringing to the fore, but I don't see any on this topic. (An example of a very lengthy article that I created which can have its one table hidden to make the whole page more viewable can be found here). Secondly, I really fail to understand why this page exists under that title. Surely it would be better as a List article (e.g. List of sharksploitation films). Nick Moyes (talk) 01:01, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for your input, a sortable table seems like the way to go, I didn't know they existed. I intend on including a lot of other films that are missing from the list, when they are included I'm sure it will be quite large. I may change it to a list page, however, myself or others may add other information that would make it no longer just a list. Some of the films to add don't have Wikipedia pages, they all have IMDB pages or foreign wikis see here for an example. Is it ok to link to those from the movie title? or would it be better to have this (IMDB) next to the corresponding film? or no link except for in the references?--Simdude1990 (talk) 10:55, 18 November 2021 (UTC) List articles on Wikipedia should contain items that still abide by Wikipedia's content policies, particularly verifiablilty and notability. Generally that means that each film should have its own English Wikipedia article (I specify English because other languages tend to have less strict content policies and guidelines); IMDb and foreign wikis aren't acceptable as they are for the most part user-generated, which trashes verifiability. Lists aren't expected to be exhaustive. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 17:07, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Can a short blurb selling a book be a source?[edit] For the article Robert Fraser (art dealer) I was considering using https://pallantbookshop.com/product/groovy-bob-the-life-and-times-of-robert-fraser/ as a source for his being promiscuous homosexual. Greg Dahlen (talk) 16:54, 17 November 2021 (UTC) How would you be using it? In general, I would think a controversial statement such as that in a person's biography article would need much more than marketing copy from a publisher. But the book itself could probably be used as a source for elements of his character such as that, when relevant. I think we need more information on what you're hoping to add and where. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 17:07, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Probably not. Such a blurb establishes no useful information other than that the book exists. --Jayron32 17:11, 17 November 2021 (UTC) A blurb is not written by the author, so cannot be reliably credited; and it may change in different editions (or be lost altogether with the dustjacket) so it cannot be reliably verified. And I would never trust a blurb to reflect a book's content accurately; they are a marketing tool designed to sell the book, not summarise it.--Verbarson (talk) 20:23, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Muckrock for government materials[edit] Hi, I'm repairing some dead links at Elan School, and one specific citation to a report by the Maine Department of Education seems to be a completely dead link. I could not find it on a web archive or the current Maine DoE website. However, I did find a list of the reports on Muckrock. I was wondering if it's kosher to substitute the dead link with a link to MuckRock and how I should cite that, since I couldn't find precedent for this. Thanks! LatakiaHill (talk) 17:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @LatakiaHill: It looks as though that particular report—number 90302—is here at the Muckrock site (scroll to top of that page). To cite it, I'd just use {{Cite web}}, filling in that URL, the title "Basic School Approval Report Pertaining to the Elan School", and other relevant fields. If the reference is just to show that Elan's program was a year-round one, that bit of info can be found on page 3 of the report. Deor (talk) 17:59, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks @Deor:! I appreciate it. Efn template not working properly[edit] Hello! So I'm working on changing the template for the map DLC on Euro Truck Simulator 2 and I'm trying to add an efn to explain the reason for a country being listed as being part of a DLC it technically wasn't released in, however when I try adding it the efn character displays however what's inside the efn doesn't display if I hover over it and it's not below the references section like it normally would be. It's in User:Blaze The Wolf/sandbox 2. What exactly am I doing wrong here? ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 17:48, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Blaze The Wolf: You need a {{notelist}} to make the efn notes work. I added one here. DuncanHill (talk) 17:58, 17 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Thanks DuncanHill for fixing it! I swear sometimes the efn would automatically add the notelist but I could be wrong. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 17:59, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Adding entries to authority control template with wikidata[edit] How do I add an entry to the authority control list on my article using wikidata? Thanks Trillkat (talk) 19:45, 17 November 2021 (UTC) What to do about unsourced, promotional, biographical articles?[edit] Hi, I recently came across the article Fayez Barakat while browsing recent changes. The article has mostly been edited by users that only write about Fayez Barakat, has no citations, and the two references with ISBNs seem to be published by a company that has only published books on Fayez Barakat. It contains plenty of unsourced direct quotes, and passages such as: "He is best known as one of the world's most important collectors and dealers of ancient art"; "At the age of 14 Barakat was offered a Fulbright Scholarship to study medicine in the United States on account of his remarkable aptitude for absorbing and understanding information" [seems extremely unlikely]; "Barakat remarks that 'our mind cannot penetrate the mystery of the Universe. We know that the number of galaxies is endless, and we try to listen with the ears of our soul the music they make moving across the infinite skies'. He looks at the universe and at the multitude of galaxies and constellations with a subliminal and telepathic telescope, seeing those eternal lights moving across the infinite through the intuitive eye of his heart. He tries to evade the boundaries of this galaxy through the intuitive dimension, breaking through the limits of space and time, and see the entirety of the infinite and of the eternal. In doing so, he fuses himself into the quantum field, into the energy moving the universe on a sub-atomic and global level. The energy the artist impresses on the canvas is the one that permeates his soul, intellect, senses and instincts, and merges into the energy which animates and moves the universe."; and so on. What do I do about this? It seems to me that the entire article should be deleted for a complete lack of sources or anything establishing notability. But how do I proceed to do this? Do I just start a proposal for deletion? Should I post on the Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons/Noticeboard to get someone more experienced to look it over, or is there something else that would be the best course of action? Thanks in advance for any help! Knuthove (talk) 20:19, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Knuthove (talk) I looked at Fayez Barakat and see it is now tagged as having multiple issues. In addition, the talk page has a new Conflict of Interest tag. Thank you for bringing this to the attention of other editors. Karenthewriter (talk) 22:39, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Knuthove, Never be afraid to remove unverified info, especially puffery of this kind. - hako9 (talk) 22:44, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Knuthove Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. I see that a number of editors have now tagged the article with their concerns, and I have personally removed swathes of uncited trivia and promotional text, and warned the IP editor about declaring a conflict of interest Assuming you are motivated to take action yourself, you could look for online sources yourself to decide whether or not this person meets our Notability Criteria for living people. The page called WP:BEFORE outlines the steps one should take prior to putting an article forward for deletion. I note there are various sources listed, though the one I did search out (see here) is clearly a self-published gallery catalogue. Maybe others are too, though some of the claims in the article (if true) do suggest he might well be notable. So some further investigation would be helpful, and then perhaps a post at WP:BLP/N could be merited if its still not clear. I hope this helps, and thanks for raising your question here. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:47, 17 November 2021 (UTC) It has now been stripped down to a mere stub, citing three sources. This may look promising, until one realizes that all three are only interviews. (I'm surprised that WP:RS doesn't mention interviews; all that I can find in a hurry is Wikipedia:Interviews, which is merely a somewhat waffly essay.) -- Hoary (talk) 23:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I looked for Fayez Barakat on Google and found his Wikipedia article and numerous Fayez Barakat generated cites. Then I went to newspapers.com and found one article (https://www.newspapers.com/image/148931789/?terms=%22Fayez%20Barakat%22&match=1) about the art dealer allegedly buying stolen items. He does not seem to have much media coverage. Karenthewriter (talk) 01:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you all for your comments and editing! I see that the article now is just about what I would have made it if I had removed the unsourced parts myself rather than ask about it here. The reason I didn't do that was because I thought the article might simply be deleted instead. Reading your comments, it seems to me that the question is whether the interviews now listed as sources are enough to establish notability, and if any other sources can be found. I am skeptical that these interviews are independent enough, and seeing how hard finding other sources appears to be, it doesn't look good. I'll go through the steps in WP:BEFORE and see about starting my first AfD discussion eventually. Knuthove (talk) 14:14, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Notability References[edit] Where and how do I enter notability references in my new Wikipedia article? CorpTool (talk) 22:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) CorpTool (talk) 22:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @CorpTool Welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for declaring your COI with regard this article. You need to find in-depth sources that are independent of the subject and which are not part of the insider news community (ecosystem) that this company works in. Use only the factual statements in those sources as the basis of the article. Right now, it's seems pretty obvious you are probably being paid to promote this article on Wikipedia because the marketing speak oozes out of every single sentence. See WP:PAID to explicitly declare who is paying you. To be frank, it's wholly unacceptable as an encyclopaedia article right now. So, cut out 9/10ths of the article's current content and present facts that establish Notability based purely upon just those key sources. Read WP:NCORP to learn more. If you feel you've already included the best sources, just link to the top three in any reply you make here and we'll take a quick look at them. I for one am not prepared to wade through dozens of probable press releases and trade magazine links to attempt to ascertain notability. I hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 23:05, 17 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Hello, CorpTool. I'm afraid that your question is like "Where and how do I build foundations for the house I have just put up?" If you write a single statement without having a reliable source wholly independent of the subject for the information in that statement, you are probably wasting your time (and other people's). In respect of Draft:Confiant Inc. I would say on a quick scan that at least three quarters of the draft should be removed, as it is pure marketing copy. Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. When you have found these independent sources, you then need to forget basically everything you know about Confiant, and write exclusively from what those independent sources say (and don't forget to include any substantial criticisms they have). An even better use of your time would be to put this project aside for at least six months while you "learn the trade" of editing Wikipedia by working on improving some of our six million articles unrelated to your COI. --ColinFine (talk) 23:07, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Also, Wikipedia:No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability is a good essay on some of the related problems here. --Jayron32 13:37, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the input. CorpTool (talk) 16:53, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Any advice on editing?[edit] Hello I am more used to welcoming new users however yesterday I was told by an admin I should not welcome new users due to be being new to wikipedia, I have done other edits such as spell checks but other then that I am not really a good editor does anyone have advice on editing? The furret lover (talk) 22:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @The furret lover: Thank you for wanting to help Wikipedia! I'm sorry you were given a bit of a scolding, but welcoming new users who have not edited articles really isn't one of the higher-priority tasks. TASKS gives you a range of general tasks, in order of difficulty; make sure you read and understand the policies, guidelines, and methods in the "More information" column before diving into a task. You may find it useful to add articles and topics that interest you to your Watchlist and reading the Talk/Discussion pages of interesting articles to see the process of improving articles. You also say you are in school, so it would also be a good idea to read Guidance for younger editors. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 22:55, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Okay thanks! The furret lover (talk) 23:33, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Citation vs link[edit] In this sentence "The United States operated a command missile system known as the Emergency Rocket Communications System (ERCS)." I could cite this page or I could put a link to it on "Emergency Rocket Communications System". Which would be the right approach? Wagsters (talk) 22:40, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Wagsters. A citation should contain bibliographic information to allow a reader (anywhere, anytime) to be able to obtain the source, and ideally also to evaluate the likely value to doing so. What's needed for this is things such as title, date, author, publication. A link to a copy of the reference is a convenience, not usually an essential part of the citation. So the answer that you should cite ie (eg using {{cite report}}) providing the URL as one of the parameters. --ColinFine (talk) 23:14, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Accidental creation of a page[edit] I accidentally created a Wikipedia page, how can I delete it or ask for it to be deleted? Michaelocow (talk) 22:45, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Michaelocow Welcome to the Teahouse. To delete a page you have created that nobody else has significantly edited, you can request 'speedy deletion' under criterion G7. To do this, click 'edit source' and place the following text at the very top of the page: {{Db-self}} and publish your changes. This should display the speedy deletion template and call the attention of an admin, such as myself, to delete it for you. (Make sure you don't include any extraneous 'nowiki' words that you might see in chevron brackets. I've only used that here to ensure that this page doesn't get deleted!) Nick Moyes (talk) 23:14, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Who are the authors? AFD and step 4 trying to bundle article[edit] Hello, first time nominating AFD, i'm at step 3, where i should let the authors know, do they mean the creator of the article or someone else? Step 3 @Wikipedia:Articles for deletion  Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 23:04, 17 November 2021 (UTC) If there are any major contributors, they would be the relevant parties. You can use the article's edit history to see if anyone has been making significant contributions to it and let them know. ??????? ? 23:09, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The page history tool gives you statistics about how much various users contributed, and when they did. I would then visit the user pages of the biggest contributors and notify those who are currently active (have edited anything within the last year). ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 23:11, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh: Thank you! Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 23:28, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I quote: most of the articles in relies articles rely on deprecated source (Atlas of the humanitarian situation) is specific to each particular incident. I can't parse this, Dawit S Gondaria. Perhaps there's something wrong with me, but I suspect that this needs rewording. -- Hoary (talk) 23:45, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Oops, thanks for pointing that out @Hoary:, Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 23:52, 17 November 2021 (UTC) most of the articles in rely on deprecated source (Atlas of the humanitarian situation): this still baffles me. I first understood it as "most of the article relies on a single deprecated source (Atlas of the humanitarian situation)"; but as I wasn't sure, I thought I'd take a look. The previous AfD talks of application to 107 articles (I think it was), yet doesn't seem to list the other 106. It's all rather confusing. Particularly surprising is that you're starting this AfD just one day after the previous AfD closed. This is understandable, given that the previous AfD was closed on "procedural" grounds; however, you're likely to get impatient reactions. You'd be wise to reword your nomination to make it easier to understand. I think you're free to do this until it gets its first comment (quasi-vote): once it gets any comments, you shouldn't continue to tamper with the nomination but should instead use additional comments (but you should be sparing with these). -- Hoary (talk) 00:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: another user launched the first AFD and included a dozen articles that have wide coverage in the media, this is why it ended in a procedural keep, but there seemed to be a consensus that Atlas is a unreliable source, so i'm making sure to add articles a batch of 25 first(after doing a before check) that relies on the Atlas. Thank you, after the first comment, i won't be tampering with nominations. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 01:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/2020 May Kado massacre (2nd nomination) i have not transcluded correctly, is there something i must do, or is it fixed by the bot? Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 23:42, 17 November 2021 (UTC) It's fixed. -- Hoary (talk) 00:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) How to link up/bundle AFD deletion discussion with related pages[edit] Help!, on the Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/2020 May Kado massacre (2nd nomination) i added the related pages, but the related pages for example Megab massacre doesn't show/link with the deletion discussion page of the latter. What do i have to do to link related pages to the deletion discussion page? I tried to do step 3, then show preview, it doesn't link to the deletion discussion page, then i tried afdx then preview, doesn't come up right either Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 02:25, 18 November 2021 (UTC) The markup for a template starts with two consecutive "{"; it must also end with two consecutive "}". -- Hoary (talk) 02:40, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: i know i couldn't do it here, but if i follow the guideline, and change or replace the current Afd message in Megab massacre, it will show an error. Can you please link it up to the deletion discussion page, so that i can learn from the diff? Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 02:57, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Dawit S Gondaria, Megab massacre is linked properly to the AfD. A number of other pages are also to be discussed in that AfD; I clicked on one of them at random (Addi Esher massacre), and found that it too is linked properly to the AfD. -- Hoary (talk) 05:26, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Ginger?[edit] Hi, on the current Ginger wiki page, it really doesn't have any clear distinct info on the actual variety of ginger out there [1] or the positive effects reported by systematic reviews. Is that meant to be normal and is it acceptable to add them in including systematic reviews that explains the positive found effects? From sources like https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7019938/? TheUntamedBig (talk) 02:04, 18 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.producebluebook.com/know-your-commodity/ginger-root/ @TheUntamedBig: Welcome to the Teahouse! The best place for this question is the talk page of the relevant article, which in this case is Talk:Ginger. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 02:30, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the tip. But I was also hoping you can answer a more general question in that is it okay to add in info about research from systematic review sources like https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7019938/ to Wikipedia articles? Are they solid enough sources? TheUntamedBig (talk) 02:41, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Reliable sources § Academic consensus does say that Review articles, especially those printed in academic review journals that survey the literature, can help clarify academic consensus, and this would include systematic reviews. But I think the reliability of the specific journal and researchers would also be important in determining whether a specific sources is appropriate. I don't have the expertise to say whether the article you linked or the journal Nutrients is reliable – this is something that would be best taken up on the article talk page or one of the WikiProjects listed at the top of the talk page. As for the "Product Blue Book" source, that looks like an industry/commercial website, which may be less reliable. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 03:04, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh thanks for the detailed explanation. Appreciate it and I think that answers my question :).TheUntamedBig (talk) 03:29, 18 November 2021 (UTC) TheUntamedBig The article does have a Research section that touches on putative health benefits. I have not checked the references to see if they meet the WP:MEDRS criteria of being reviews, systematic reviews or meta-analyses. You might also look at the other "G" dietary supplements Ginseng, Garlic and Ginkgo biloba to see how medicinal and traditional uses are described. David notMD (talk) 09:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Can I start my own newsletter?[edit] I was just wondering, is it possible for me to create my own Wikipedia newsletter? (It sounds like a fun project reporting what's going on in Wikipedia, but also difficult. And, I don't know if I even can.) WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 02:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) WaterflameIsAwesome, this is an encyclopedia. Fun is incidental. I suggest that you make a thousand or so substantial improvements to existing article -- improvements in the judgment of other editors, who build on your edits rather than reverting them. Then you can decide whether or not you want to create a newsletter. And if you still do, then after those thousand improvements you'll know what you're writing about. -- Hoary (talk) 02:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Ok, good idea. I just thought it would be something else to make Wikipedia worth my while. Because I'm not gonna sit around Wikipedia just editing articles all day. I just thought it would be a good break from doing my duty, but I'll try and get 1,000,000 edits before I start a newsletter. :/ WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 02:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Nobody expects you to edit articles all day. Your fellow-editors hope that the edits that you do make are improvements. (If one in fifty is mistaken, OK. If a substantial percentage are mistaken, not OK.) To take a break from improving articles, there are many possibilities, many of them away from your computer (or phone). -- Hoary (talk) 02:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I meant like other things on Wikipedia, not including away from WP. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 02:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) WaterflameIsAwesome, I think it's good to approach Wikipedia as a reader, and then, while you're reading, to encounter some kind of deficiency or irritation or other kind of problem -- and then not to rush in but to think about it: "Do I really know what's going on here? Am I sure that what I have in mind is an improvement?" When you are pretty confident that you can answer "yes and yes", improve it, carefully. This may take rather more time than you want to spend on it, but when it's done you'll be more confident of what you're doing. Look for opportunities to make similar improvements elsewhere. Soon you'll be pretty good at this, and fast, too. That will bring a feeling of satisfaction. (Just one thing: Avoid looking for "grammar mistakes". A certain kind of editor cites something written in an underinformed, silly book about grammar -- there are plenty of these, many of them from respected publishers -- and wastes lots of time inflicting some so-called "grammar rule" on perfectly good prose.) -- Hoary (talk) 07:34, 18 November 2021 (UTC) To @Hoary: WP:LIGHTENUP. To @WaterflameIsAwesome: check out Wikipedia:Department of Fun. ––FormalDude talk 02:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Bah, Hoary (talk) 05:15, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Getting to 1,000,000 edits is a reach. According to Wikipedia:List of Wikipedians by number of edits, only 13 people have surpassed that milestone. David notMD (talk) 09:45, 18 November 2021 (UTC) To WaterflameIsAwesome: if you're planning to write your own Wikipedia newsletter, and send it out to a mailing list that you maintain yourself, that's fine, I doubt anyone here can stop you. If you're planning to publish it using Wikipedia itself, you may encounter difficulties. Wikipedia has its own monthly newsletter, The Signpost, which used to have interesting articles about the running of Wikipedia, but has become anodyne since the Wikimedia Foundation starting influencing its contents. If your plan is to compete with The Signpost, I wish you success; but you're going to need some good high-level contacts to supply your information. Maproom (talk) 12:30, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Tips on creating a user page[edit] I need help on what I should add to my user page. I've created it, but I'm not sure what to do with it. Here it is: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:WaterflameIsAwesome WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) oh shoot I forgot my signature provides a link XD WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:23, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @WaterflameIsAwesome: you could add what you first edit was. You could add userboxes based off your interests; something maybe like sports. You can also add userboxes that say how many edits you have made etc. you can also look at my user page for an example and my userboxes that you might want to use. Kaleeb18 (talk) 03:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Citations[edit] Sorry that im asking a question about the same article again. in the section other films section in the Woody (Toy Story article are my uses of the IMDb citations inappropriate, because I saw some WP article that said it is not a reliable source sometimes. Also can I use this as a citation for the whole part where the article talks about how woody appears in the short films? Kaleeb18 (talk) 03:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Kaleeb18: Citing IMDb is generally discouraged because it is user-generated content; Citing IMDb and IMDB-EL have suggestions on when IMDb might be an appropriate source. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:15, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Did You Know[edit] Can anyone here please tell me how I can find yesterday's DID YOU KNOW (17th Nov, 2021). I had seen about someone breastfeeding in the nursing room, in front of some males, and she was also a politician. Actually that is not the case, I want to find yesterday DID YOU KNOW. I cannot find it in the page history?? Cannot understand why. Please assist me in the following matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:02, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Here's the DYK archive for the current month, with links and search for the whole archive. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:10, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionhThanks a lot for helping me again. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:16, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh Yeah it was Susan Catania. I wanted to read about her. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:19, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Just so you know - the reason you couldn't find it in the history of the front page is that the Did You Know section is a template, rather than an article. So you'd have to check the history of the template rather than of the front page itself. DS (talk) 19:28, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I do not understand why a New York Times reference has been flagged as an unreliable source. Help?[edit]  Courtesy link: Martha Nothmann The source is: "A Nazi Legacy Haunts a Museum’s New Galleries", url https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/11/arts/design/kunsthaus-zurich-buhrle-collection.html The message I received was: "Ways to improve Martha Nothmann Hello, Eli185, Thank you for creating Martha Nothmann. I have tagged the page as having some issues to fix, as a part of our page curation process and note that: Many of the references are unreliable, such as the one from The New York Times The tags can be removed by you or another editor once the issues they mention are addressed. If you have questions, leave a comment here and begin it with @Qwerfjkl:. Remember to sign your reply with Eli185 (talk) 07:37, 18 November 2021 (UTC). For broader editing help, please visit the Teahouse. Delivered via the Page Curation tool, on behalf of the reviewer. Qwerfjkltalk 07:23, 18 November 2021 (UTC)" What am I supposed to do if a reviewer does not like the content of a NYT article about Nazi art looting in a Wikipedia article about a Jewish art collector? Eli185 (talk) 07:37, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Eli185, Qwerfjkl actually specified the NYT in their comment in your talk page. You responded by politely asking what was wrong with it. That was a good response. Now wait for the answer. (If no answer comes in a couple of days, then you'd be welcome to bring up the matter elsewhere.) -- Hoary (talk) 08:51, 18 November 2021 (UTC) How is everyones day[edit]  Dsmi3939 (talk) 08:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism on page Kanchi Kamakoti Peetham by anonymous user ip[edit] An anonymous user 117.223.250.19 has deleted entire intro and writes propaganda. Pls help. Where should I report?Kannadiga kanmani Kannadiga kanmani (talk) 09:48, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I see only one edit (a large deletion) by that IP address, which you reverted. I suggest you put the article on your Watch list, but do not bother to warn or ask for a block on the IP unless this is repeated. David notMD (talk) 09:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) How to move articles from sandbox to the main space[edit] kindly help me to move an article from my sandbox to the main space. User:Ngangaesther/sandbox Ngangaesther (talk) 10:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Please, see Wikipedia:So_you_made_a_userspace_draft#Ready!. Ruslik_Zero 12:52, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Editing the content of a page[edit] Good day, As the communication team of Societe Generale de Banque au Liban, we have noticed some wrong information in the presentation of our bank on Wikipedia. Can you kindly help us through the best procedure to amend the content without violating the page? i.e. an "allegation section" contains erupted information that we are seeking to remove. As for the introduction, we would like to bring some modifications reflecting the current description of our bank. Awaiting your kind feedback in order to bring the required amendments as soon as possible. Best regards, Christelle Feghaly Head of Press & Media Relations Cfeghaly (talk) 11:21, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Cfeghaly. Before you or anyone of your fellow team members try to edit the article about your bank, I strongly suggest you and they take the time to carefully read through Wikipedia:Conflict of interest, Wikipedia:Paid-contribution disclosure and Wikipedia:Plain and simple conflict of interest guide because they most certainly would apply to you or anyone else connected to the bank based upon what you posted above. Then, you probably should also take a close look at Wikipedia:Ownership of content because it's important for you and your fellow team members to understand that your bank doesn't not have any type of editorial control over what's written about it on Wikipedia. This doesn't mean that anyone can simple write whatever they want (good or bad) about the bank on Wikipedia, but it does mean that all content about the bank is going to be assessed in accordance with relevant Wikipedia policies and guidelines and may be considered acceptable even if it's not something the bank likes. -- Marchjuly (talk) 12:29, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Strong warnings have been placed on your Talk page about declaring paid situation and ceasing to edit the article directly. Same applies to User:Elite Moussa. David notMD (talk) 12:47, 18 November 2021 (UTC) That said, I did look at the article and to be frank, all I see is mention of an uncited allegation made by an unspecified "local newspaper", with two reasonable-looking sources denying that the allegation was incorrect. It makes me feel that the entire two sentence allegation section is quite possibly not appropriate in the article, and was done for POV purposes, and that it should be removed until better sources are found. The Press & Media Relations Team in the form of @Cfeghaly is advised to make an WP:EDITREQUEST on the talk page, detailed explicitly what changes they would seek other editors make for them. They can then investigate what, if any Reliable Sources have been published and make the changes accordingly. Declaring their Conflict of Interest in that edit and also on their Userpage would be important things to do, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 14:05, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Declined Article due to notability[edit] How do I make my subject notable, if i have added reliable sources? Jasminbrown1202 (talk) 14:40, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Jasminbrown1202 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. I assume this refers to Draft:Tonesa "FirstladyofBMF" Welch. You cannot make the subject notable, but you can demonstrate their notability with independent reliable sources with significant coverage of the person. Much of the draft is unsourced(see WP:REFB for assistance with citations). 331dot (talk) 14:46, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Also see Wikipedia:No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. Notability is something that the subject has, not the article. You need to demonstrate that the subject is themselves notable by citing sufficiently in-depth, independent, reliable sources where you got the information for writing the article from. See also WP:42 for a concise explanation. --Jayron32 15:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) So is the problem I need to add more sources inside of the article? The subject is notable. She was the head of the biggest drug trafficking and money laundering organization in the country. Everyone knows who BMF is. Big Meech and Southwest T. She is the longtime girlfriend of Southwest T and was on the indictment. She has had tv shows casted behind her role as well as a Documentary done on her through BET. I am not sure what else I should add. Perhaps those clips inside the article? — Preceding unsigned comment added by Jasminbrown1202 (talk • contribs) 15:23, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Jasminbrown1202, and welcome to the Teahouse. The points you mention in your last paragraph are all relevant to notability in the world, but not one of them is directly relevant to Wikipedia's criteria for notability, which are mostly to do with "is there enough independent material reliably published about this person to base an encyclopaedia article on?" Remember that Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. --ColinFine (talk) 16:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Cleaned up, and added Wikilink to Black Mafia Family. See Help:Referencing for beginners on how to convert URL refs to properly formatted refs. A suggestion: work on refs in your Sandbox, then move to article only when those are in good shape. Up to you to demonstrate that existing or additional refs are about Tonesa Welch. David notMD (talk) 17:31, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people on that Wikipedia page need to be guided through it?[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 15:35, 18 November 2021 (UTC) The relevant page is List of people from Merseyside. As you can see, ACtiling has made many edits to the page, with good intentions, but many have had to be reverted as they also removed people without any reason, and were misplaced. Any guidance from editors here that can be offered to this enthusiastic editor will, I'm sure, help. Ghmyrtle (talk) 15:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) ACtiling Please read the policy at WP:LISTPEOPLE.--Shantavira|feed me 16:09, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Long quotation in a talk page[edit] Hello. The Talk:Etel Adnan page contains a lengthy quote from Among Good Christian Peoples: Teaching Etel Adnan's "Sitt Marie Rose" by John G. Champagne published in College Literature Vol. 27, No. 3 (Fall, 2000), pp. 47-70 (24 pages) Published By: The Johns Hopkins University Press. Even if it isn't copyvio there is a template: {{Over-quotation}} stating that lengthy quotations are not encyclopedic, however that template expands into "This article" not "This talk page". The documentation that I've found regarding this doesn't discuss talk pages so I don't know if a lengthy quotation in a talk page is an issue. The owner of the account who wrote the quotation doesn't seem interested in doing anything about the quotation. The quotation is out-of-context and not cited; it does not appear to be transformative. Is the quotation copyvio? Thanks Jamplevia (talk) 15:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Edição[edit] Como editar um artigo? Artajeiro (talk) 15:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Google's Translation: Header: Edition Text: How to edit an article? ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 16:01, 18 November 2021 (UTC) This is the English language Wikipedia. Perhaps you are looking for the Portuguese Wikipedia? --David Biddulph (talk) 16:03, 18 November 2021 (UTC) List of countries[edit] List of countries with their first National Hockey League player - Chris Chelios was born in GREECE (please add this to the list) Cheers, Pat Reid  2001:1970:4CDD:200:2934:2AEC:4C57:DE2 (talk) 16:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please direct your comment to Talk:List of countries with their first National Hockey League player. There, the editors that follow that article will see it. 331dot (talk) 16:49, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Not according to Chris Chelios. --David Biddulph (talk) 16:50, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Edit to Atom (software)[edit] Can someone approve of my edit to atom (software) MCBOiS1210 (talk) 17:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) As far as I can see, MCBOiS1210, you have neither edited Atom (software) nor put a request on Talk:Atom (software). What are you trying to do? --ColinFine (talk) 17:10, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Evidently, I mean Talk:Atom (text editor). --ColinFine (talk) 17:13, 18 November 2021 (UTC) David Leigh Clark[edit] I have been asked to add info for my present Wikipedia reference (David Leigh Clark). I have used online instructions since computes became common but I cannot understand how to add a biography to my name. I registered for an account but need some help. I don't know what a TILDES is?  Pleh15 (talk) 18:07, 18 November 2021 (UTC) For information on not writing an autobiography, see WP:autobiography. To find out about a tilde, see tilde. --David Biddulph (talk) 18:16, 18 November 2021 (UTC)  Courtesy link: David Leigh Clark Wikignome Wintergreentalk 18:17, 18 November 2021 (UTC) "Tildes" is the plural of "Tilde". One tilde: ~ Two tildes: ~~ End a post to a talk page with four tildes, and the system will expand that into your signature plus a timestamp. DS (talk) 19:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Dr. Vin Gupta[edit] Help with AfC for Dr. Vin Gupta Hello! I've had two experienced editors provide excellent feedback for an AfC for Vin Gupta, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Vin_Gupta They've both independently said they had hoped for one last editor to weigh in to ensure an "unbiased outcome" and since its been a few weeks, I was hopeful you might be willing to assist. Thank you again. Caroline grossman23 (talk) 18:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) It says: "Review waiting, please be patient. This may take 2 months or more, since drafts are reviewed in no specific order. There are 2,397 pending submissions waiting for review." Remember that there is no deadline. --David Biddulph (talk) 18:27, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Permission for a photo[edit] I want to add a photo to the article on my father, mathematician, Beresford Parlett. The original photographer of the photo is now deceased. Just to make sure, I contacted his widow and asked permission to use the photo for the Wikipedia site. She said "yes" to me verbally. However, when I tried to post the photo to the site it was later taken down. How do I get official permission to post this photo? SlamDunk2000 (talk) 18:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @SlamDunk2000:: Instructions are available at Wikipedia:Requesting copyright permission; there's a optional form letter for the copyright holder to complete and an email address to send the permission to where someone will verify the proper release of copyright. If you have more specific questions on how to navigate that page, please let us know. --Jayron32 18:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Need help to re-edit page to remove a content problem panel.[edit] Hi there. A panel has just appeared on my wiki page saying that some of the wording on my page is self-promoting for want of a better word. Could anyone help me go through my page and edit it so I can meet the guidelines and get this panel down? thanks! Page link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johanna_Spinks 107.185.204.212 (talk) 19:10, 18 November 2021 (UTC) It seems Njd-de is already working on cleaning up the page (thank you, Njd-de!). If you have further concerns or questions, there's always the article's talk page: Talk:Johanna Spinks. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 20:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Sumner bio[edit] It's okay with me if you delete the biography I wrote of myself. I am not a "notable" person and don't meet your guidelines. Indiana Author (talk) 19:41, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Edit reversion[edit] FYI?– Separated from above section. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 19:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) So this user reverted my edit to Sir Keir's talk-page and I saw red and added in the link I posted on the talk page on the mainspace (along with an edit summary basically slandering him) which I'd added in the hopes of generating some kind of discussion. Obviously I feel a little foolish about this and wish I hadn't done it. What can I do to make amends? Phil of rel (talk) 19:46, 18 November 2021 (UTC) "spamming"[edit] You asked me to "stop spamming my book." I will comply. However, I defend all the changes I made as factually accurate and documented in the University of Chicago Archives, where I did most of the research for my book on Amos Alonzo Stagg. David E. Sumner, PhD Indiana Author (talk) 19:47, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Even if there was nothing wrong with the additions, hopefully you can understand the conflict of interest, and that Wikipedia edits should be made by people independent of the subject. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 19:57, 18 November 2021 (UTC) For context, I am the user who called his edits spam. user:Indiana Author wrote the autobiographical article David E. Sumner without disclosing his conflict of interest, and then mentioned his recent book in something like 30 different articles at his "publisher's suggestion" [3]. Meters (talk) 20:06, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1055948815" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Wikipedia discussion Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 18 November 2021, at 20:06 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH Finnusertop, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 Beginner's Query 2 Question 3 Inquiry about pending article list 4 There is a question about my sources whether they are independent or primary. 5 My Gill Stegall article 6 What to do with blank pages? 7 Sebastian Mikosz 8 Declined entry 9 Most Vandalised Pages 10 What to do about users with promotional or vanity userpages? 11 Notability question, academic/lawyer Draft:Priti_Krishtel 12 Large list of suggested edits not showing up on talk page? 13 page edit not accepted 14 hi 15 How to create an archive of my talk page? 16 Question 17 Unfair deletion of an article 18 Maximum 19 Speedy deletion nomination of Draft:Corrado Maria Saglietti 20 Delete discussion 21 Status of resubmission 22 Bot 23 Page Statistics 24 Link to the german-language Wikipedia 25 Movember 26 Question from K5gproWiki (15:59, 16 November 2021) 27 Capital punishment in the Bible 28 Funk art 29 Citations 30 How to give warnings with Twinkle tags 31 Difficulty understanding Wiki's definition of notability 32 Como editar uma página da wikipedia 33 Follow-up to Repeated non-acceptance of a Wiki Page Need A Reviewer who is Knowledgable about Gospel Music 34 Adding a footnote citation to top of a Wikipedia entry that already has other footnote citations 35 Popularity of any one particular article 36 Question regarding copyright 37 Dear whoever is going to read this. 38 Is there a place that's not as drastic as AfD for getting a second opinion on an article? 39 Ingleside (Amelia Courthouse, Virginia) 40 The Future of Wikipedia 41 Userpage 42 Wikitampering: One chart, 52 weeks 43 Cultural Appropriation Not Right!!! From an Indigenous Lens 44 Regarding to biography page 45 hlep me in publishing new article on laxminiya Youth club 46 Draft:Shyam Sunder Jyani 47 Experimenting With Country Data Templates 48 BPL 49 new round of discussions regarding the controversy section in the "Our Lady of Fátima" page 50 Follow-up to How to write about a "Group of companies" in wikipedia 51 Problems with submission 52 Image size 53 Question about Draft:Ezekiel Clark 54 Shortcut Button for reply 55 Wikipedia Teahouse Archive 56 Notability of Troom Troom 57 Article for Creation: Van Romaine 58 PLEAS HELP ME, i cant not publish my draft 59 How to create click to drop down segments of an article? 60 Can a short blurb selling a book be a source? 61 Citing Muckrock for government materials 62 Efn template not working properly 63 Adding entries to authority control template with wikidata 64 What to do about unsourced, promotional, biographical articles? 65 Notability References 66 Any advice on editing? 67 Citation vs link 68 Accidental creation of a page 69 Who are the authors? AFD and step 4 trying to bundle article 70 How to link up/bundle AFD deletion discussion with related pages 71 Ginger? 72 Can I start my own newsletter? 73 Tips on creating a user page 74 Citations 75 Wiki Did You Know 76 I do not understand why a New York Times reference has been flagged as an unreliable source. Help? 77 How is everyones day 78 Vandalism on page Kanchi Kamakoti Peetham by anonymous user ip 79 How to move articles from sandbox to the main space 80 Editing the content of a page 81 Declined Article due to notability 82 I would like to add people on Merseyside people on that Wikipedia page need to be guided through it? 83 Long quotation in a talk page 84 Edição 85 List of countries 86 Edit to Atom (software) 87 David Leigh Clark 88 Dr. Vin Gupta 89 Permission for a photo 90 Need help to re-edit page to remove a content problem panel. 91 Sumner bio 92 Edit reversion 93 "spamming" Most recent archives 1112, 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131 Beginner's Query[edit] Hi. I'm completely new to the world of Wikipedia (although I have been watching it with a somewhat passive interest) and I wanted to ask a question based on an 'if'. If I were to create an article and I make sure that it's notable, will it get rejected or accepted? or is there any other policy (There are seemingly a lot of them) that I might not uphold I will appreciate all ResponsesGuyForceOne (talk) 04:50, 12 November 2021 (UTC). GuyForceOne (talk) 04:41, 12 November 2021 (UTC) You mean, if the subject were notable, GuyForceOne? No, that wouldn't guarantee acceptance. Please see Help:YFA. -- Hoary (talk) 04:46, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the response, Hoary.GuyForceOne (talk) 04:51, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, GuyForceOne. Determining that the topic is actually notable is the most important first step in creating a new article, but not the only necessary step. The reliable sources devoting significant coverage to the topic need to be converted into informative references, and those refences need to be added to the draft article in the right places . The content of those references needs to be summarized neutrally in the prose that you write, and the summary needs to exclude copyright violations or other violations of policies and guidelines. When all of those factors are taken into consideration when writing a new article, it is highly likely to survive. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 06:42, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, GuyForceOne, and welcome to the Teahouse and Wikipedia. To use an analogy I employ increasingly often, your question is a bit like "I am new to the building trade. If I build a house will it stand up or fall down?" The answer is that if you try that today, it will either fall down, or cost you a lot of pain and more experienced builders a lot of effort, in making it solid. My advice to new editors is always to put aside the idea of creating a new article for at least six months while you "learn the trade". I remember when I was a new editor, and I desperately wanted to "make my mark" by creating a new article; but that is not the only way to add value to Wikipedia, and until you have learnt the trade, it is a particularly poor way to try and do so. --ColinFine (talk) 11:36, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the response,ColinFine but I feel like you answered my question thinking that I 'WILL' make a new article whereas I based my question on an 'if'. Still, thanks.GuyForceOne (talk) 09:16, 13 November 2021 (UTC) I think if you are fairly confident that you have a notable subject, you should go ahead and create your article. I created mine when I knew nothing about Wikipedia but there’s many helpful people in the teahouse who helped. I’ve learnt so much writing my first article. Unless you get your hands dirty, you’ll never really learn. I’ve learnt more from my mistakes than what I read up. Unless you’re the kind who can spend a few months taking a course on wikipedia and start right. Elenatina (talk) 09:27, 13 November 2021 (UTC) I am going to slightly disagree. if you can accept that your work might disappear [(https://www.theverge.com/2017/9/3/16226038/wikipedia-deleted-wiki-titles-articles 400 articles of all ages are deleted for 800 articles created)] and you think even if it does you will learn things then it's worthwhile. (I can't find the stat or Wikipedia:Articles for Creation stat). Your first articles will take about 4 hours. If you can create a page ,and you don't choose to go through Articles for Creation, then it could be marked for deletion within 5 minutes. After 10 to 20 minutes of AfD editors' times spread over a few days, it could then be deleted in 7 days. . Now, if you still want to go ahead, and you have no connection with the subject, then read Wikipedia:Articles_for_deletion current discussions for awhile, so you can understand how they work, and why they are so distrustful because of the amount of effort some people put into scams and spam. Good Luck Wakelamp d[@-@]b (talk) 10:28, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Elenatina Can you advise what courses there are on Wikipedia? Wakelamp d[@-@]b (talk) 10:28, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for your response,Elenatina. Your advice has been carefully noted and I also have the time to take a course.GuyForceOne (talk) 09:34, 13 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Writing_Wikipedia_Articles_course @Wakelamp — Preceding unsigned comment added by Elenatina (talk • contribs) 10:52, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Thank-you. Wakelamp d[@-@]b (talk) 11:50, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Question[edit] Hi! My question is that after reading the queries on Teahouse, I want to know how do I find the 'substandard' articles. Do I have to manually search for them, or is there another way?( I know this question sounds silly, but responses are appreciated GuyForceOne (talk) 05:24, 12 November 2021 (UTC) @GuyForceOne: Hello and Welcome to the Teahouse. I have a good news and a bad news about your question. The good news: Many articles with problems are already tagged and appear in subcategories of Category:Wikipedia article cleanup. The bad news: there are still thousands of substandard articles out there that haven't been tagged or improved. Those are a bit trickier to find, as you pretty much have to stumble across them. Victor Schmidt (talk) 05:40, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Hi GuyForceOne. Not a silly question, but also not one to easily answer without knowing what you mean by substandard articles. I'm not sure a perfect article exists, but there is a general way of assessing articles as explained here. So, you could look for articles which have a low assessment and then then try and improve them. These assessments (outside of WP:FA and WP:GA articles), however, can be quite subjective and perhaps an article with a low assessment is actually not all that bad at all. There are also lots of article which have been tagged with maintenance templates because someone feels/felt such articles have problems that need addressing, You can find these articles listed in categories like Category:Wikipedia maintenance categories sorted by month, but you might also try looking at Wikipedia:WikiProject Guild of Copy Editors since the members of that WikiProject seem to keep track of articles that need attention. -- Marchjuly (talk) 05:42, 12 November 2021 (UTC) @GuyForceOne Also, if you want to find an article that has the same kind of problems as one you were just working on, look at the "hidden categories" that are shown at the bottom of the "edit source" page for each article. -- asilvering (talk) 06:23, 12 November 2021 (UTC) Welcome @GuyForceOne, I am going to guess and think that you are looking for an area to concentrate on. Personally, I have spent a lot of time randomly reading articles that interested me and correcting them. That made me happy, and now I am off trying to understand why some errors and that made me happy. I saw on your user page that you are skilled in grammar and you speak a second language. You could have a look at the area below - and if it doesn't work out try somewhere else BUT always try to be doing at least two different things and if you don't like it, or feeling yourself getting upset, then move or stop for awhile Wikipedia:Pages needing translation into English#Translated pages that could still use some cleanup Wakelamp d[@-@]b (talk) 12:45, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for your responses @Victor Schmidt,@Marchjuly and @Asilvering.GuyForceOne (talk) 08:42, 12 November 2021 (UTC) @GuyForceOne: One definition of "substandard" is "questionable notability". These would be in Category:All articles with topics of unclear notability or more specifically for this month, Category:Articles with topics of unclear notability from November 2021. Article topics with doubtful notability should either be deleted (propose for deletion at Wikipedia:Articles for deletion) or improved by adding citations to reliable sources that are independent of the article subject. Another definition of "substandard" might include articles that have been modified by an editor with a conflict of interest (COI), or worse, by an undisclosed paid editor (such editors need to disclose they're being paid, or get blocked). Articles tagged with COI are in Category:Wikipedia articles with possible conflicts of interest or a dated category like the notability one above. Articles tagged with paid editing are in Category:Wikipedia articles with undisclosed paid content or a similar dated category. I'd consider articles with notability, COI, or paid-editing problems to be a higher priority for cleaning up than articles with cleanup templates. And there are thousands to choose from. Good luck! ~Anachronist (talk) 19:47, 13 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the response, User:Anachronist.GFO (talk) 03:17, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Inquiry about pending article list[edit] hello everyone! i hope you all are having a nice day as its children's day today. i am Stobene45 I have a small question, where can I find the list of pending article topics? And please tell if there are any errors in my format. thankyou Stobene45Stobene45 (talk) 06:39, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Stobene45 (talk) 06:39, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Stobene45, Hello. You can find the list of pending article list in Category:AfC pending submissions by age. Thank you. Richard M William (talk) 06:49, 14 November 2021 (UTC) thankyou soo much Richard M William. Can you also tell about the requested article list? thankyou 9Stobene45 (Stobene45) — Preceding undated comment added 07:00, 14 November 2021 (UTC) @Stobene45: there is a list at Wikipedia:Requested_articles. Unfortunately potential new articles can linger on that list for ever, because no one is obliged to write them. If you want to have a go, there will be plenty of grateful people! Elemimele (talk) 10:23, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Elemimele thankyou soo much for help. I will try to help as much as possible :) Stobene45 (Stobene45) — Preceding undated comment added 06:54, 16 November 2021 (UTC) There is a question about my sources whether they are independent or primary.[edit] I was told by a reviewer that all my sources appear to be primary. when I checked the first three, I saw a lab's work that was contracted much like we contract Quest labs to do our urinalysis or bloodwork. The 2nd and 3rd are links to the FDA where it lists the company as bonafide and one of its researchers that does clinical trials. My company does not control what these other three put out, especially the FDA. So I'm confused why they would be considered primary sources. Before I take the time to put up what I consider further independent sources, Like from clinicaltrials.gov, I need to know where I stand, so if I can get some guidance from someone, I'd appreciate it. The product PPP001 is very significant and the first cannabis flower plant to be in a Phase 2 and Phase 3 clinical trial as a drug. Each pellet of it is made to exact specifications. They even have a synthetic version. No cannabis plant has ever gone through Phased FDA and Health Canada clinical trials to become a prescription drug before, so this is a first in the field. I checked my first three references. One is another company's output on PPP001, their analysis. They objectively analyze data from a Tetra Biopharma clinical trial done under the FDA and/or Health Canada. Then I showed two references at the FDA US Food and Drug Administration showing that the company, TBP, is indeed registered with them as a recognnized organization (SRO) etc. But the editor considered those to be primary, if I read correctly. I'd like a quick review of the page and also of my additional sources I collected to add. I can cut and paste from my Wordpad when you are ready to see those: a number are from clinicaltrials . gov. I think a cursory glance would suffice on those to tell. Thank you. Thanks. MightyMaven (talk) 14:39, 14 November 2021 (UTC) MightyMaven, Hello and welcome to the teahouse! The source you've mentioned isn't Reliable, which means that sources need editorial integrity to allow verifiable evaluation of notability, per the reliable source guideline. Secondary, which provides an author's own thinking based on primary sources, generally at least one step removed from an event. Independent, which means excludes works produced by the article's subject or someone affiliated with it. For example, advertising, press releases, autobiographies, and the subject's website are not considered independent. You mentioned a website clinicaltrials.gov which is a website of governmental agency. But it is not regarded as reliable source. More at WP:GNG. Thank you. Richard M William (talk) 14:53, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Richard. The first source is a bonafide research organization which provides their own thinking, composition and analysis of the research done by Tetra Biopharma. The work is Alta Vista's own thinking and it is based on the clinical trial data at the FDA or Health Canada or both, so the article is not the work of Tetra BioPharma but it scientifically covers it. It is also independent since that means it's not the company in question's advertising, press release, autobiography or website. I will check about clinicaltrials.gov not being reliable. So FDA and Health Canada and NIH database are considered all not reliable? this is very strange to hear. Are you certain the FDA and these other government agencies are not considered reliable? I will look at the reference, but that makes no sense to call FDA, HC, clinicaltrials.gov not reliable, if you ask me. They are the ones who approve the drugs our doctors recommend. If there is some nuance I am missing, I will try to grasp it. Thank you for your reply and reference for me to read. — Preceding unsigned comment added by MightyMaven (talk • contribs) 15:25, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Okay, I got this from your Reliable link. It says, and I quote, "Scholarship WP:SCHOLARSHIP: Prefer secondary sources – Articles should rely on secondary sources whenever possible. For example, a paper reviewing existing research.... — Preceding unsigned comment added by MightyMaven (talk • contribs) 15:29, 14 November 2021 (UTC) MightyMaven, Yeah, you're right now. Newspapers, books and e-books, magazines, television and radio documentaries, reports by government agencies, and academic journals' website are considered as reliable, secondary and independent. Richard M William (talk) 15:45, 14 November 2021 (UTC) That's why I confirm with FDA, Health Canada, NIH, and clinicaltrials.gov. To quote Wikipedia on reliability where you sent me... "Sources may encompass published works in all forms and media, and in any language. Availability of secondary sources covering the subject is a good test for notability. (So to know for certain if a company's claims of conducting clinical trials Phase 1-3 are true, rather than quote the company itself, I quote FDA, HC, clinicaltrials.gov to prove it, not a company PR.) The Wikipedia guideance also states that "Sources"[2] should be secondary sources, (such as FDA and clinicaltrials.gov which gets its information from the FDA as to what trials are being conducted, all independently from the company claiming to be in clinical trials) as those provide the most objective evidence of notability. So I don't see what the problem is using FDA, HC, clinicaltrials and AltaVista (an independent company that's published it's analysis of Tetra Biopharma's research. I'm also going by what Maggie Dennis says about it. She's Interim Chief of Community Engagement, Wikimedia Foundation, and the company expert on what Wikipedia considers a reliable news source or source of information and what criteria go into making that determination. — Preceding unsigned comment added by MightyMaven (talk • contribs) 16:02, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Reliability page also states that "Reliable scholarship – Material such as an article, book, monograph, or research paper that has been vetted by the scholarly community is regarded as reliable, where the material has been published in reputable peer-reviewed sources or by well-regarded academic presses." This is exactly why I quote the NIH database of peer-reviewed articles on the pharmaceutical pages I contribute to. That Altavista publication is capable to be listed in the NIH database. It also refers to NIH dataased articles in major journals. I kinda think people are thinking that marijuana is totally void of notoriety, therefore FDA Phase 2 and 3 clinical trials must be bogus and not for real. I assure you they are for real. — Preceding unsigned comment added by MightyMaven (talk • contribs) 16:07, 14 November 2021 (UTC) You have a tendency toward walls of text (your User page!!!) which makes it difficult for volunteers here at Teahouse and elsewhere to wade through and then offer advice. Your recent interests are Draft:PPP001 and HU-308, which appear to be related. The first was declined in June and you have not edited since. The reviewer identified refs as being primary sources. I will add that many do not meet the requirements of WP:MEDRS. At HU-308 you increased the length of the article by more than 10X by adding large amounts of content and references that do not meet WP:MEDRS. By that, I mean all in vitro research, all animal research and all individual clinical trials. Subsequently, editors have made large deletions, but much remains that has no valid reason to be in the article. Lastly, given that both relate to cannabis, I will ask if you have conflict of interest or paid relationship to this topic? David notMD (talk) 16:53, 14 November 2021 (UTC) Given that the OP's fourth sentence above begins My company does not control..., it seems there is a COI. @MightyMaven: you should read WP:COI and make a declaration of any conflict of interest on your user page. CodeTalker (talk) 17:47, 14 November 2021 (UTC) MightyMaven, all biomedical information in a Wikipedia article must be based on sources that meet the high standards in Wikipedia:Identifying reliable sources (medicine). Your first source was co-authored by people employed by AltaVista and Tetra Biopharma, and therefore is is not an independent source, and cannot be used to establish notability. The fact that clinical trials are underway does not make a drug notable. Please read Wikipedia: WikiProject Medicine and its associated standards and Manual of Style. When you write My company does not control what these other three put out, especially the FDA. So I'm confused why they would be considered primary sources, that indicates that you are confusing "primary" with "independent". The FDA is a primary source here, and the first source is primary and not independent. Independent, secondary reliable sources are always preferred. Your statement also shows that you have a conflict of interest and must comply with the required Paid contributions disclosure. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 18:03, 14 November 2021 (UTC) At Draft:PPP001 I have left a recommendation that the draft as written be rejected. Speedy deletion is also a consideration, as content appears to have been copy-pasted verbatim. possibly representing a copyright violation. Consider also that this appears to be WP:TOOSOON. Only after clinical trials are complete, published in peer-reviewed journals (not conference abstracts) and then covered in reviews written by people with no connection to the company could this be reconsidered. David notMD (talk) 18:46, 14 November 2021 (UTC) In addition to making a User page paid contributions disclosure for PPP001, do the same for HU-308. In the interim, I have tagged HU-308 as being contributed to be an undisclosed paid editor. David notMD (talk) 19:11, 14 November 2021 (UTC) If you were stating "My company..." as to how your company operates, but there is no connection between you/your company and PPP001 or HU-308, state that clearly and succinctly on your Talk page. David notMD (talk) 17:20, 16 November 2021 (UTC) My Gill Stegall article[edit] My article on Gill Stegall is easy to find, since it's my only article. The first person to review it was helpful and I followed his/her advice on referencing. Now I've had it denied two more times, one by someone saying it's "just not a newsworthy person" or whatever (I didn't realize everyone has to be the Queen of England), and then the next person denying it simply came back saying the references weren't good enough. Really? United Press International articles are not adequate references. Maybe this person is too young to even realize what the UPI was. I would like someone to look at it again and be fair about it. Hubdb39 (talk) 06:26, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Pinging Devonian Wombat, TipsyElephant, and Gpkp for their thoughts. TheTechnician27 (Talk page) 06:31, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, you make a good point about UPI, now sunk so low. (But I haven't looked at either of the two UPI sources that are cited.) However: someone saying it's "just not a newsworthy person" or whatever. I don't see this. Just what did the person say, and where did they say it? -- Hoary (talk) 06:45, 15 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary:, It seems to me that the content in the denial-tag: ?This submission's references do not show that the subject qualifies for a Wikipedia article' is interpreted as 'non-newsworthy' or 'non-notable'. @Hubdb39: Here are few concerns over the draft: *The draft is still lacking inline citations, which is necessary as a proof for all the content mentioned. *The references are mentioned as plain links, on which WP:REFB and WP:RS can be referred. *There is a useful guidline on press-release sources: WP:PRSOURCE. --Gpkp [u • t • c] 07:16, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Gpkp, you or I may believe that every assertion in an article ought to come with at least one clearly identifiable reference, but English-language Wikipedia does not demand this. Inline citations are not "necessary as a proof for all the content mentioned". -- Hoary (talk) 07:35, 15 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: do you agree to accept and publish the draft to article, without having a single inline-citation? --Gpkp [u • t • c] 07:53, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Gpkp, I'm not going to accept it or reject it. American team sports are a complete mystery to me; thus for example "professional football wide receiver and slot back" (in the very first sentence) makes no sense to me. It's obvious that a great number of Wikipedia editors have at least some understanding of (American) football, so I'll leave this to one or more of them. -- Hoary (talk) 08:09, 15 November 2021 (UTC) @Hubdb39: @Hoary: and @Gpkp: I've cleaned up the article (improving wording, adding in-line refs, etc.) and moved the page to mainspace, as he meets the notability criteria. BeanieFan11 (talk) 01:21, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I suggest you search the The Atlanta Journal-Constitution as they may have a number of references to him Wakelamp d[@-@]b (talk) 13:37, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hey Hubddb39 ! I've just visited the draft and i've added to some relevant WiKiprojects to get more help, and reorganized it. There is one problem though, you haven't linked the references to where you used it. It makes verifying content a lot harder so please match it! i am not a bot , and just sounded like one in this comment. This action was NOT made automatically. Leomk0403 (talk) 08:53, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Yeah, look at articles for other American football athletes to see how to incorporate the refs into the body of the article. Help:Referencing for beginners may help. David notMD (talk) 12:26, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you all! — Preceding unsigned comment added by Hubdb39 (talk • contribs) 23:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) What to do with blank pages?[edit] I've been trying to cleanup Category:All uncategorized pages , but metTemplate:Di-conflicted license-notice. This template has no content, so i've nominated it at WP:TfD. So my question is, what to ex with blank pages, in all namespaces, in general exept for nominating it for WP:AfD/RfD/TfD? Leomk0403 (talk) 07:17, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Leomk0403, in case of article, you can move it to draft instead nominating by using this script. Richard M William (talk) 08:21, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks @Richard M William ! You're talking if the subject meetls the Wp:N guidelines right? Leomk0403 (talk) 08:32, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Leomk0403, Yeah, if the article doesn't meet with WP:N guideline then you should move it. Richard M William (talk) 08:30, 15 November 2021 (UTC) @Leomk0403 @Richard M William Before considering moving to draft please study WP:DRAFTIFY. The Draft: namespace is not intended as deletion by the back door. FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 08:49, 15 November 2021 (UTC) After hearing your comments , i think treating it like a vandalized article would be the best (e.g reverting to the last constructive edit) or add more data to it is one of the best solutions P.S is there any guidelines for this problem? Leomk0403 (talk) 08:57, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Richard M William FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me Guys, this guy actually has no idea what hes doing with GA articles. He nominated this [1] without contributig to the article, second he instantly failed Talk:Pale mountain pigeon/GA1. 112.163.180.40 (talk) 13:10, 15 November 2021 (UTC) @112.163.180.40 please WP:AGF and WP:BITE. Leomk (Don't shout here, Shout here!) 09:05, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Sebastian Mikosz[edit] Hi. I want to get a clearer understanding for the eligibility criteria for a Wiki entry. I have submitted an entry on Sebastian Mikosz, who is the EVP of Environment at the International Air Transport Association. He is a former CEO of Polish LOT airlines and Kenya Airways. He has been credited with helping return both airlines to profitability. The sources I quoted were interviews and news articles in the Financial Times, Reuters and the Associated Press. I also work as a consultant for IATA so it is part of my job to try and establish a Wiki page for him. Before IATA I was a journalist for more than 30 years including 18 years at CNN. I believe that he is a worthy enough candidate for a Wiki page, with strong media coverage to back it up. The last comment was that the subject (Sebastian) was basically not worthy of an entry. I respect the editor's decision but would like to know why. Kind regards. Andrew Astevens888 (talk) 11:48, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Astevens888 (talk) 11:48, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Astevens888 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you have not already, please review conflict of interest and paid editing for information on required formal disclosures you must make. Wikipedia has articles, not mere "pages". This is a subtle but important distinction. Interviews and press releases do not establish notability as Wikipedia defines a notable person. What is needed are independent reliable sources that are not based on the subject's own words or any other materials put out by them(or their organization). Company CEOs are often notable, but not always- there must be significant coverage of them in independent reliable sources. Your draft was rejected, meaning that it won't be considered anymore, because the reviewer felt that the likelihood of such sources was low. 331dot (talk) 11:52, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Astevens888. Please also consider the fact that if at some point Wikipedia has an article about Mikosz (whoever writes it), the article will not belong to him, will not be for his benefit, will not be under his or your control, will not necessarily contain what you or he would like it to contain, and should be almost entirely based on what people unconnected with him have chosen to publish about him, good or bad, not on what he or his associates say or want to say. --ColinFine (talk) 18:14, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Astevens888, the references in your draft that display properly as online references are bare URLs, which are unsightly, confusing and make verification difficult. Some of your references are formatted in such a strange way that they do not even show URLs. Please read Referencing for beginners, and reformat your references so that each and every one of them displays correct bibliographic information and links to websites when they exist. This is especially important for the references that would verify that he was the CEO of LOT and Kenya Airways, since those positions are his most plausible claim of notability. As for your long career, that is very nice and congratulations. But it means very little here on Wikipedia. What matters here is the quality of your contributions to this encyclopedia, and to be frank, your references are all botched up. Please fix them and then ask here for another look. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 07:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Declined entry[edit] Added header ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 15:05, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Can you explain to me why the entry I submitted "Historical Bioarchaeology" was declined as not worthy of being a separate article, while for example the entry "Medieval bioarchaeology", is sufficient for a separate article? Thank you in advance! Anna karligkioti (talk) 15:00, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Draft:Historical bioarchaeology Karenthewriter (talk) 16:17, 15 November 2021 (UTC) @Anna karligkioti: There was an earlier discussion to merge Medieval bioarcheaology and bioarcheology Talk:Bioarchaeology#Proposed merge with Medieval bioarchaeology, but the consensus seemed to be to do nothing. I think there's just too much content specific to the medieval branch, so a "fork" was justified. Perhaps start a discussion at Talk:Bioarchaeology, or see if you can merge your draft into the main article. If it doesn't work, then a fork will make sense. BTW - many of us are OCD pedants here, so I went through your draft and fixed the title headers and fixed the order of the punctuation and ref tags. Ref tags come after punctuation. Good luck! TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 22:45, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much Tim! I will try to do my best! — Preceding unsigned comment added by Anna karligkioti (talk • contribs) 08:20, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Most Vandalised Pages[edit] Which pages are the most vandalised on Wikipedia?  Damianlewis21 (talk) 20:17, 15 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Damianlewis21. Unsurprisingly, that information can be found at Wikipedia:Most vandalized pages. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 23:37, 15 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think that page is up to date considering it's a historical and non-functional page. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 14:55, 16 November 2021 (UTC) What to do about users with promotional or vanity userpages?[edit] Hi, I've been browsing the user creation log recently, looking for vandalism, and I have come across several users like User:TopViralTrending and User:Exoticanimals1, whose only edits are the creation of a promotional user page. This really seems like it's against the rules. At the very least they are obviously not here to build an encyclopedia and using Wikipedia as a web host, but what do I do about them? Do I report the user on WP:ANI? Is this enough to get them blocked by itself? Do I request speedy deletion of the user page? Do I do both? Do I just not care since the user page won't show up in searches and takes up basically no storage space, so the admins time is better spent on more destructive vandals? Thanks for any advice! Knuthove (talk) 01:40, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Knuthove. You are correct in both cases. In the future, promotional usernames should be reported to Wikipedia:Usernames for administrator attention. The shortcut is WP:UAA. Please read Wikipedia:Criteria for speedy deletion to learn how to tag inappropriate pages for deletion, and the shortcut is WP:CSD. In these cases, G11 is the appropriate tag. I am an administrator and have blocked both accounts and tagged both pages. You may wonder why I didn't just delete those pages. I think it is best to have another administrator involved in these cases, just in case I may have misunderstood the situation. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 01:59, 16 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Hi Knuthove. Both of the pages have already been deleted or tagged for deletion by an administrator; so, there's not much to be done with respect to them. For furture reference though, all user pages are expected to comply with WP:UP and those which fall under WP:UP#NOT are generally not considered appropriate. So, the simple answer would be to follow WP:UP#On others' user pages: (1) try and explain the above to the user in question, and then (2) tag the user page for speedy deletion or "fix" the page yourself if the user in question doesn't respond or otherwise does nothing to make their user page policy compliant. However, things aren't always so simple and users are generally given a bit of leeway when it comes to their user pages. For example, more experienced editors who are clearly WP:HERE for reasons other than mucking around on their user page might be given a little more slack when it comes to UP#NO unless the page is really really problematic, whereas the deletion ax tends to more readily fall with respect to newer editors who have very few edits in the WP:MAINSPACE who appear to be more WP:NOTHERE than anything else. Such user pages tend to be more readily tagged for speedy deletion per WP:U5 than perhaps the user pages of more experienced and established editors. Bascially, you sort of have to do a little self-assessing to see what type of editor you're dealing with and then go from there. Such discussions about user pages (particularly user pages of established editors) can become contentious quite quickly and end up creating lots of drama which in the long run might not be to anyone's benefit; so, sometimes simply asking an administrator to take a look first might be a better approach than jumping in with both feet and tagging pages for deletion. -- Marchjuly (talk) 02:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for both your replies and the quick blocks! I guess these were pretty obvious, but what about users like User:Ayazayoob.96, User:Systemandpain or User:Dj Banx? My guess is that I should request CSD for the user page of the first one under "A7. No indication of importance (people, animals, organizations, web content, events)", and explain a bit to the user, but not report him. Perhaps link to WP:YFA and WP:BIO? And do I do anything about the last two? Knuthove (talk) 02:18, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I'm not an adminstrator, but in my opinion I don't think any of the three cases you've mentioned above require that anyone be reported. Each of these people appear to be new or newish editors who simply might not be aware of relevant policy regarding user pages. Honest good-faith mistakes are often made by editors simply because they don't know any better, not because they're intentionally trying to create problems or otherwise cause trouble. In addition, I don't think it would be appropriate to try and apply WP:A7 in the first case simply because that criterion applies to the article namespace and not the user namespace. Perhaps you could argue that WP:U5 would apply here, but again that might depend on what you think the intent of the editor in question really was. Many people mistake Wikipedia for a type of social media site and think their user page is like a profile page. Many people mistakenly try to create new articles on their user page because they thinks that's what needs to be done. These are just misunderstanding that can often be resolved through talk page discussion per WP:BITE without needing to have any pages deleted or any editors reported. My guess is that the editor in the first case probably just is mistakening his user page for a social media type profile. The account has only made a couple of edits so far and probably just doesn't no any better. So, perhaps adding a welcome template to their user talk page would be a good place to start. You could then add {{uw-userpage}} or a more personal message advising them about WP:UP and the other things you mentioned above if you want. Then, if they respond in an unfavorable way or don't respond at all after a reasonable amount of time, you could tag the page for speedy deletion per WP:U5. As for the other two editors, they two appear to be quite new with only a couple of edits; so, you can do the same thing for them as well. However, the content on their respective user pages is basically just a few words which is probably not worth deleting the page over. If they start to add more and more inapprorpriate content, then perhaps something might need to be done at that time. Right now, however, both pages seem to be pretty minor violations of policy not really requiring that further action be taken. -- Marchjuly (talk) 04:51, 16 November 2021 (UTC) That sounds like a good course of action. I'll read WP:UP and write User:Ayazayoob.96 a message. Thanks again for your advice. Knuthove (talk) 15:28, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Notability question, academic/lawyer Draft:Priti_Krishtel[edit] I submitted this article for review Draft:Priti_Krishtel I stated that I think she is notable in the normal way, but also notable due to criteria 7 of WP:ACADEMIC. If I am correct about the former, I may be over-complicating it by mentioning the later. There is a short discussion at Draft_talk:Priti_Krishtel where the reviewer and I discuss and they suggest I write here to get more experienced reviewer's eye on this. CT55555 (talk) 02:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @CT55555: A quick glance at the sourcing suggests that your draft would benefit from having one or two more in-depth profiles of Krishtel. The sources you added appear to be more about her initiatives than her. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 07:25, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Large list of suggested edits not showing up on talk page?[edit] I just made a large list of suggested edits here: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Talk:Solar_Simulator&redirect=no However, it appears that any link to this list of suggested edits is not found in the talk page of the article: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Solar_simulator Can someone help me figure out what I did wrong, and how can I get the list of suggested edits onto the appropriate talk page so it will be visible and reviewed appropriately? FreshAlien (talk) 02:58, 16 November 2021 (UTC) It's a capital letter thing. Your huge block of proposed content is at Talk:Solar Simulator, whereas the redirect to Talk:Solar simulator does not carry that content with the redirect. David notMD (talk) 03:11, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Moved (with attribution) FreshAlien's edit request to Talk:Solar simulator#Large update and expansion suggestions for Solar Simulator Article per suggestion at contested technical move requests (permalink). Rotideypoc41352 (talk · contribs) 16:07, 16 November 2021 (UTC) page edit not accepted[edit] User talk:24.52.202.85 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search November 2021 Information icon Hello, I'm DuncanHill. I wanted to let you know that one or more of your recent contributions to Jacob Rothschild, 4th Baron Rothschild have been undone because they did not appear constructive. If you would like to experiment, please use the sandbox. If you have any questions, you can ask for assistance at the Teahouse. Thanks. DuncanHill (talk) 13:27, 15 November 2021 (UTC) A few comments: 1.) What does "do not appear constructive" mean? My update is true, but not constructive? Does sharing truth so that people can perhaps one day be brought to judgment not matter at Wikipedia? 2.) "please use the sandbox". Are you trying to be non-confrontational? If you don't allow facts to be added to web pages, then say it, don't add a deflecting clause like that, you come off as weak. 3.) I don't have any real questions, these are rhetorical. Now go lock my account like a useful idiot. BigdogNova (talk) 05:42, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Everything on Wikipedia has to be referenced to a reliable source. Wikipedia's definition of "truth" can be thought of as: "someone in a reliable newspaper said it". If you posted something that you considered true, even if it were self-evidently true, it will have been removed if you couldn't back up your statement by pointing to some reliable newspapers who said it. Wikipedia also adopts a neutral point of view; it's not the place to campaign, or to right great wrongs. In this instance, your comment appears not only to have been deleted, but to have been suppressed from normal view, so I can't judge. But I'm guessing you wrote something highly negative with no source. That's the Wikipedia equivalent of finding someone guilty without a trial. We don't do things without evidence. I'm sorry that it's caused you disappointment, but I hope this explanation helps to provide background. Elemimele (talk) 06:46, 16 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Content added to Jacob Rothschild, 4th Baron Rothschild by IP 24.52.202.85 was deemed to be such a serious violation of Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons that it needed to be Wikipedia:Revision deleted by an administrator. As for your questions, non-constructive is basically an edit that isn't considered an improvement or helpful and it can cover various things. Generally, it means a edit made that doesn't comply with one or more of Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Sharing the truth is fine, but Wikipedia content needs to be verifiable in addition to being true. Furthermore, it's not the purpose of Wikipedia to bring people to judgement. This doesn't mean that negative content about persons cannot be added to articles, but it does mean that any such content needs to be written in a neutral tone, reliably sourced and not be undue. Facts can be added to articles, but they need to be verifiable facts which reflect what reliable sources are saying about something. The template added to the IPs user talk page was just a general user warning template designed to cover a broad range of situations. Its intent isn't to deflect, but rather to inform an editor that some of their edits are problematic and provide with information as to why. Since the content the IP added was deemed to be so bad that it needed to be revision deleted, it's no longer visible to anyone other than administrators. If you're the editor who added it, then you should know what it was and thus understand why it was removed. Wikipedia may be the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit, but it's not a free for all where anything goes. Content which is deemed to be a serious violation of relevant Wikipedia policies and guidelines can be removed by anyone at anytime; this is particularly true when the content is about living persons as explained here. If you want to edit Wikipedia and be WP:HERE, then great and there are lots of editors who can help you figure out how to best do that. If, however, you want to be WP:NOTHERE, then you're going to find yourself running into problems non-stop and perhaps even eventually ending up with your account locked. The choice is yours, but Wikipedia isn't like social media where you can pretty much post whatever you please. -- Marchjuly (talk) 07:16, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @BigdogNova: I can't see what you added, but DuncanHill felt it was worth removing forever. Other than that, this query is the only contribution associated with your account. After a long yet productive day helping others who truly want to make this encyclopedia a better place for everyone, I can only read your comment and think WP:NOTHERE. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 07:17, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, BigdogNova. The unreferenced and therefore unverifiable edit in question to Jacob Rothschild, 4th Baron Rothschild was made by an IP address, presumably you based on your comments. You are accusing, without providing any evidence, that this living person is responsible for starting a war that has led to hundreds of thousands of deaths. I hope that you can see that such a claim requires very solid evidence in the form of coverage in impeccably reliable sources. Your confrontational comment, Now go lock my account like a useful idiot is quite pointy and really quite ridiculous. You have now been informed that adding unreferenced attacks on living people is unacceptable, no matter how much you believe conspiracy theories about them. So, you can either follow Wikipedia's Policies and guidelines, or be blocked if you choose to violate them. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 07:39, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @BigdogNova: I am the editor who reverted your edit and posted the warning on your talk page, as well as reporting it for oversight or revision deletion. I did this because 1) it was an uncited addition to a biography of a living person, 2) it was a gross libel on that person, and most disturbingly 3) it repeated a hoary old anti-Semitic conspiracy theory in an article about a member of probably the most famous Jewish family in the world, an article which has been subjected to repeated anti-Semitic vandalism in the past. I would have absolutely no hesitation whatsoever in doing the same again. I am happy to explain my actions here, but they are something for which I shall never apologise. DuncanHill (talk) 15:49, 16 November 2021 (UTC) hi[edit] hi,Anyone? Athena-en (talk) 07:16, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Athena-en: Please don't remove the COI template from Xian Jun Loh without a discussion. And please see WP:COI. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 07:21, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Timtempleton:?received.07:52, 18 November 2021 (UTC) How to create an archive of my talk page?[edit]  Excellenc1 (talk) 07:20, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Excellenc1: Ask and you shall receive. Please see Help:Archiving a talk page. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 07:22, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Question[edit] There is a draft of an article in the English Wikipedia (see this [2]. It was declined previously because it was in Bengali language. I am a Bengali, and my native language is also Bengali. It is someone's article, but I want to translate the article, and then resubmit the article in AFC. What is the most correct and legal way to do the same? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 07:45, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Itcouldbepossible. Although this specific situation is unusual, the general principles described at Wikipedia:Translation apply. You are responsible for proper attribution, for checking that the cited sources actually verify the content, that the topic meets the English Wikipedia's notabilty guidelines, and the accuracy of the translation although you can make justifiable changes to the content. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 08:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible, Hello! It is perfectly "legal" for you to edit drafts like these and submit them for review when you think they're ready. "Draft:" drafts are open for everybody like articles, but "User:" drafts are not. However, it could be polite to ask the creator of draft first, but there is no guarantee they will see your question soon or at all. WP:BOLD is fine. My advice is to first collect the sources that would make this topic meet WP:GNG, without them the article won't be accepted in mainspace. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 08:07, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @@Gråbergs Gråa Sång: Well can I move that draft to my sandbox, and then edit it?Itcouldbepossible (talk) 08:50, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible No, just edit it where it is. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 08:51, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Gråbergs Gråa Sång: Ok, thank you for your suggestion. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Unfair deletion of an article[edit] Hello I had an article about a famous person on Wikipedia and I wad editting expanding it day by day when I suddenly faced with its deletion and following up the matter the user: JBchrch who had put the speedy deletion on my page said because it "seemed like" I was a fan of him!! This could only be out of cruelty and unfair to delete a page just because a person is famous and popular and the writer of his article might like him especially when nothing was against the Wiki rules and guidelines! I wonder if anyone out there in Wiki headquarters could help me retrieve my article or say what should I do for this injustice going on? R30591 (talk) 08:33, 16 November 2021 (UTC) courtesy ping: JBchrch  melecie  t - 08:49, 16 November 2021 (UTC) failed that first courtesy ping. JBchrch  melecie  t - 08:50, 16 November 2021 (UTC)  Courtesy link: Shahab Moradi You need to provide reliable, independent sources that show that he is indeed notable. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:01, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @R30591: The article has been deleted once, and I can't see the history of that version, but the present article is not nominated for deletion at all. As far as I can tell, JBchrch is trying to give you good advice on your talk page. From your phrasing it's evident that you're too attached to Moradi, making it hard for you to stay from a neutral point of view. I would also suggest you to try editing other subjects, and if you haven't already, complete The Wikipedia Adventure to get a crash course on how things work around here. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:19, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Per action minutes ago, now at Draft:Shahab Moradi. Because it appears that an earlier version was Speedy deleted, that version is not visible to non-Administrators. The advice about learning more about how Wikipedia works before returning to work on the draft is good advice. David notMD (talk) 11:25, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Just wanted to say, thanks a lot @Ganbaruby: for helping me out with my article too, haha. (I'm writing my article for the same reason as R30591) WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:52, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Maximum[edit] What is the maximum number of questions I can ask on Teahouse? I have already asked many. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 08:54, 16 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! there is no limit, feel free to ask away! happy editing!  melecie  t - 08:55, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hmmmm. There have been instances in the past wherein a new editor asked question after question at Teahouse, but otherwise was making no contributions to existing articles nor attempting to create a new article. WP:NOTHERE (as in NOT HERE) states that editors may be warned or blocked if clearly not here to improve the encyclopedia. David notMD (talk) 11:36, 16 November 2021 (UTC) In other words, as long as you are asking questions and also making helpful contributions (possibly using what you learn from asking questions) then there's no limit. But as David said above if all you're doing is asking questions then NOTHERE can apply and you can be warned/blocked. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 14:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Blaze The Wolf I feel like it's also unfair that users who get blocked from editing can't ask questions at the Teahouse. Because I feel users have the right to still ask questions even when edit-blocked. It's sad. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:55, 16 November 2021 (UTC) They can ask questions about their block on their user talk page, unless they abuse that right. --bonadea contributions talk 07:31, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Speedy deletion nomination of Draft:Corrado Maria Saglietti[edit] Hello. I submitted the Draft page: Corrado Maria Saglietti and the page has been deleted. If I understood correctly, the reason for the cancellation was that the bio was too similar to that of the website of the same name. Furthermore, the review of the page led to this result: "Your recent article submission to Articles for Creation has been reviewed! Unfortunately, it has not been accepted at this time. The reasons left by KylieTastic were: This submission is not adequately supported by reliable sources. I would like to ask if I can try to publish the same page again with the following changes: inserting more reliable sources/ references and changing the biography and the photo. Thanks! Corrado57 Corrado57 (talk) 09:31, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Corrado57: The message on your talk page explains that the original draft article was a copyright infringement, as you obviously realise. Wikipedia takes copyright very seriously and the only way to get an article about Saglietti approved will be to rewrite it from scratch using your own words, based on the sources. Please read WP:YFA and WP:BLP. The new article will have to show that he is a notable musician by Wikipedia's definition. Note that photographs do not help to illustrate notability and I would suggest you ignore that aspect until the article is accepted. Mike Turnbull (talk) 11:33, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I see that there is an article about Saglietti in the Italian-language Wikipedia at it:Corrado Maria Saglietti but even there they say the sources are inadequate. Mike Turnbull (talk) 11:41, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Mike, thanks for your message! I have read notable musician Criteria for composers and lyricists: I think points 1-2-4-5-6 are satisfied. I would like to say the reason for submitting this draft: the works of the composer Corrado Maria Saglietti are very appreciated and performed above all outside Italy (60 different States between the US and the rest of the world). So apart from the satisfaction of being on an English Wkipedia page, I think finding a reference for this composer can be useful for those who do a search using Wikipedia from other countries and not from Italy. I have no problem writing the biography differently and using another photo and I can insert references to repertoire books citing works by C.M. Saglietti. If that's enough I'll send another draft, if not thank you anyway. Corrado — Preceding unsigned comment added by 79.51.171.121 (talk) 14:42, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Delete discussion[edit] I nominated a specific article for delete discussion. What are the next things that I can do??? How can I attract wiki uses attention to the delete discussion? And who will decide if the article can be kept or deleted?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:43, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Itcouldbepossible, and welcome to the Teahouse! The AfD has been listed at the appropriate categories to attract attention from other editors, so all you need to do now is wait for others to take a look and share their thoughts. After a week or so, if enough people comment, a consensus may form, and a closer, typically an admin, will evaluate the discussion and determine the consensus, if any. ––FormalDude talk 09:54, 16 November 2021 (UTC) FormalDude Ok thank you,for your suggestion. Also I want to know, how I can list delete discussions in appropriate XFD pages???Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:57, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @FormalDude, @Itcouldbepossible has already asked a question at the Teahouse, so I don't feel saying "welcome to the Teahouse!" is necessary. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:58, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I suggest, Itcouldbepossible, that you read up on when articles should be nominated for deletion before you make another nomination. -- Hoary (talk) 12:02, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Status of resubmission[edit] I added a citation to my article on Shmuel Goldin and resubmitted. Where do I check the status of this resubmission? Thanks. Lcurchack (talk) 09:46, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Lcurchack: Draft:Shmuel Goldin was unsubmitted, but I've now submitted it on your behalf. You can check the draft page anytime to view the status of the review. ––FormalDude talk 09:49, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Bot[edit] How can I create a bot, and help Wikipedia, in keeping vandalism out of sight?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:49, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: First have a look at the anti-vandalism tools that are already available. Then determine whether you are ready to be a bot operator. If you think you are, then thoroughly read through the bot requests for approval and discussions, and really think about whether you are ready to nominate yourself for this huge responsibility. There are many ways to fight vandalism, most of which don't require advanced privileges. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 10:04, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Page Statistics[edit] Once I had made the settings, but now I have forgotten it. I had turned it off for some reason. When I used to go to a specific page, it used to give me all the information about that specific page, like who created the page, when was it created, page visits, and more on the top of the page. But now I have forgotten how to make that setting again. Please tell me how to get back that setting. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:53, 16 November 2021 (UTC) That's XTools in the Gadgets panel. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 11:57, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Link to the german-language Wikipedia[edit] Please can you tell me, how can I set a link to the german-language Wikipedia? Thanks a lot.--Helmut Hoppenstedt (talk) 10:14, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Helmut Hoppenstedt, is Template:Interlanguage link what you're after? Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 10:24, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a lot, but only a part of the links to the german-language Wikipedia work as I want them to do.--Helmut Hoppenstedt (talk) 11:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Helmut Hoppenstedt: what do you want to do and what isn't working? ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 11:22, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I want to put some links to 24 articles in the german-language Wikipedia, which I wrote since 2015. All these links are on my Wikipedia-Homepage. These are all articles concerning german law.--Helmut Hoppenstedt (talk) 11:53, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Instead of {{ill|Beck-Blog|de| Beck-Blog}} you can just put the direct link de:Beck-Blog and so on. The reason the links are currently showing as red is, of course, because English Wikipedia doesn't have the corresponding articles, so the inter-language link only actually links from the [de] part. Mike Turnbull (talk) 12:01, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Ok, thank you very much, I try to do so.--Helmut Hoppenstedt (talk) 12:10, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Helmut Hoppenstedt@Michael D. Turnbull That is a feature, not a bug. Beck-Blog [de] shows that there is no en-WP article, like a normal redlink, and that there is a de-WP one. If an en-WP article is created, this automatically turns into a normal-looking WP-link. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 13:45, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I did as Mr. Turnbull told me to do and it worked. The other way, see the official side, didn´t work.--Helmut Hoppenstedt (talk) 13:51, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Movember[edit] Movember A very new editor is adding un-cited references to this page and writing in an informal tone. I'm not skilled enough to kindly directly them to stop. Can anyone more skilled give them some kind words? CT55555 (talk) 15:39, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @CT55555: Could you possibly tell us what user you are referring to and what their edits are? The most recent edits to the page appear constructive (except for the one referring to No Nut November which is unsourced but still constructive) so I don't see why they would need to be warned. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 15:43, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Blaze The Wolf: Indeed it's the one about "no nut november" which wasn't cited and also the explanation of what it meant didn't seem formal enough to me for Wikipedia. Likewise the next edit about video games isn't sourced. So both edits lack sources. In the context of it being new editor, I felt it would be appropriate to say that things need to have sources CT55555 (talk) 15:49, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @CT55555: The editor isn't necessarily all that new (their account is about 2 years old), however I think it would be best to mention it to them on their talk page in case they simply forgot to add a ref. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 16:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) To be honest, it's not just a matter of citations. I'm more concerned that the only link between No nut November and Movember is that someone who wanted to go viral decided the best way was to hijack a widely popular movement and pick a name that looked like Movember, even though there is no other common factor between them. No nut has nothing to do with men's health or moustaches. There are a couple of other links there that seem decidedly irrelevant too. What's with play-off beards? Is this going to be a repository of random links to anything that mentions facial hair? Elemimele (talk) 19:00, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Question from K5gproWiki (15:59, 16 November 2021)[edit] anyone pls teach me how to make professional stuff K5gproWiki (talk) 15:59, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Added heading. Rotideypoc41352 (talk · contribs) 16:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia editors are volunteers, i.e., not paid. As to how to get better at editing, see links at Help:Introduction. David notMD (talk) 17:04, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, K5gproWiki. If you're asking about editing Wikipedia, please see my reply to #Hi above; if you're talking about something else, then I'm afraid that this is not a place that can help you, as this page is only for questions about using and editing Wikipedia. --ColinFine (talk) 17:07, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Capital punishment in the Bible[edit] i am a professor of Hebrew Bible/ Old Testament at Duke. how can i go about editing this page, correcting many of the deficiencies noted? marc brettler — Preceding unsigned comment added by 152.3.43.54 (talk) 16:02, 16 November 2021 (UTC) You may make an edit request(click for instructions) detailing changes you feel are needed, on the article talk page, Talk:Capital punishment in the Bible. 331dot (talk) 16:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Alternatively, you could create an account (there is no need to use your real name) and when it is autoconfirmed you'll be able to edit the article directly. It is protected from direct access by IP-only accounts because it suffers from so much vandalism. Whether you edit directly or via an edit request, please be sure to supply reliable sources for any change. However expert you are, we do not allow original research in Wikipedia. Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:14, 16 November 2021 (UTC) The artice is currently under protection (WP:SEMI) but that expires in a couple of days. WP:TUTORIAL and WP:EXPERT can be of help to you. Also: PLEASE improve that article. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 16:53, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Click on Talk (upper left) to see if some of what you have in mind has been subject of past or current debate. David notMD (talk) 17:06, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Funk art[edit]  Jack Leissring (talk) 16:18, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Jack Leissring Hello and welcome. Do you have a question about the funk art article? 331dot (talk) 16:19, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I suspect he is wondering why Fyrael reverted some of his recent additions. According the message placed on his Talk Page, Fyrael suspected the additions were self-promotional. As I'm not an expert in the topic, I don't know whether WP:SELFCITE applies. Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:24, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Fyrael is willing to discuss the edits with you, however you have not responded to their comments on the talk page. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 16:28, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Citations[edit] I was reading WP:Cite and I realized it said parenthetical citations were depreciated in Sep. last year and the article I’m working on, Woody (Toy Story), might have parenthetical citations. For example one of the citations is Price 2008, p. 126 is that considered a parenthetical citation or a short citation? If it isn’t how can you tell the difference between them? Kaleeb18 (talk) 17:16, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Kaleeb18: The section of WP:CITE that you're referring to says that what's deprecated is "short citations in parentheses placed within the article text itself, such as (Smith 2010, p. 1). This does not affect short citations that use <ref> tags, which are not inline parenthetical references." So, no, the short citations in the Woody article aren't what's deprecated; they would have to be changed only if they had been inserted in parentheses in the article text itself, rather than as footnotes. Deor (talk) 18:16, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Deor: Oh Thank you, that makes a lot more sense now. Kaleeb18 (talk) 19:18, 16 November 2021 (UTC) How to give warnings with Twinkle tags[edit] I asked this question to the editor, who gave me welcome message, but he is not answering it. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_talk:HiLo48#Tag_Twinkle --ZebraaaLounge (talk) 18:13, 16 November 2021 (UTC) ZebraaaLounge (talk) 18:13, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @ZebraaaLounge: Those are given with the tool called Twinkle, however I recommend you don't use it until you've gained a bit more experience and you resolve the edit war you are currently engaged in. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 18:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @ZebraaaLounge: it is absolutely unacceptable for you to falsify another user's signature, as you did in this edit. I don't know what you were trying to do, but please do not ever do that again. CodeTalker (talk) 19:38, 16 November 2021 (UTC) CodeTalker, Where did I falsify their signature. Wikipedia was having lots of page loading, problem, and server error. I wrote their names instead of pinging them. I was replying to one user mentioning another user's name. And in the whole edit, only my signature has links to my user page, talkpage. They are obviously watching their last edits, and that's why I did not ping them at that time.ZebraaaLounge (talk) 02:17, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I checked again and saw I ended the comment with my signature only. And page history will show who made what edit. ZebraaaLounge (talk) 02:31, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @ZebraaaLounge: I think you messed up with that edit. If you look what happened in the diff, not only did you add a comment of your own, correctly signed, but you also changed someone else's signature from a comment 4 paragraphs higher so that it read [[User:NarSakSasLee|Echo1Charlie]] instead of [[User:NarSakSasLee|NarSakSasLee]]. This would have presented the text Echo1Charlie (while linking to NarSakSasLee, who actually wrote the paragraph so signed). You can see how this would create a very bad impression, as it looks as though you are trying to put NarSakSasLee's words in Echo1Charlie's mouth. Best avoided! Elemimele (talk) 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Elemimele: @CodeTalker: I understand what happened now. Their names NarSakSasLee are uncommon words, jumbled letters, so not easy to spell. I was copy-pasting their names to write my own comment. Instead I copy-pasted another's name in other's signature. Their signature has spelling. Bbb23 name is easy to remember. ZebraaaLounge (talk) 07:06, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Difficulty understanding Wiki's definition of notability[edit] Hello, I can't seem to understand what significant coverage means for a Wiki article to go up. I used references that are not biased and that show significant coverage about the subject. Could someone help me? Ernestoche0 (talk) 18:58, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Ernestoche0: WP:GNG says that sources should show "significant coverage in reliable sources that are independent of the subject." To be independent, a source must not have been created with the help of the subject, which means that self-written pieces or interviews are not okay (that's refs number 1, 2 3, 6, 7, 8; also see WP:PRIMARYSOURCE). The rest don't show significant coverage because they're mostly trivial mentions of Miller within the context of his company. Those sources could potentially be used to write an article about the company instead. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 20:27, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Como editar uma página da wikipedia[edit]  Anapaulacosta71 (talk) 19:19, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Google's Translation from Portuguese: How to edit a wikipedia page? ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 19:25, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Bom dia, Anapaulacosta71. See Help:Introduction - unfortunately there doesn't seem to be an equivalent in Portuguese, but if you find Spanish easier to read than English, then try es:Ayuda:Introducción. --ColinFine (talk) 22:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Repeated non-acceptance of a Wiki Page Need A Reviewer who is Knowledgable about Gospel Music[edit] Hi, we've had the page submission denied twice for 'Vicki Mack Lataillade', "You indicate that the articles references only mention Vicki in "passing". How knowledgeable are you in the Gospel Industry? I think there should be a more knowledgeable reviewer. Vicki is a huge force in the gospel industry her record label GospoCentric records already has a wiki page. Leonzaigirdar (talk) 20:39, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I know nothing about gospel music but you have used a number of press releases, these are not considered reliable or independent, so will need replacing. Theroadislong (talk) 20:44, 16 November 2021 (UTC) They would likely tell you the same thing. You cannot use the existence, absence, or condition of another (tangentially-related) article to argue for yours. If your sources don't discuss her at length, are not editorially independent of her, or have no professional editorial control, then the article is going to be declined. We will NOT budge on this in the slightest. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 20:48, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Please also note that undisclosed paid advocacy is prohibited by our policies on neutral point of view and what Wikipedia is not, and is an especially serious type of conflict of interest. Theroadislong (talk) 20:52, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Adding a footnote citation to top of a Wikipedia entry that already has other footnote citations[edit] Not sure how to add a new citation to the top of a Wikipedia piece I created in the sandbox so it shows up as a footnote citation at the end of the article. I previously used the Reflist template for other references on this piece. Is there an easy way to do this? JhallCORE (talk) 20:53, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @JhallCORE: I'm confused as to what you're trying to achieve. Footnotes will show up wherever {{reflist}} is, and we always put that at the end of the article under a header titled "References". Could you elaborate on what you're trying to do and why? ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 21:16, 16 November 2021 (UTC) The first (newly added) citation needs to start with <ref>, not </ref>. It is currently appearing in the lead of the article rather than the References section. 173.49.228.131 (talk) 21:46, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Popularity of any one particular article[edit] Hi all! So I edit all over the place, and have even taken a recent interest in helping to revert vandalism and other good things I can get myself into. Wikipedia has proven to be my "stress outlet"... believe it or not. . On to my question... I was curious if there is any tool to tell the "page views" or "popularity" of any ONE particular specific article. Lets take Philadelphia as a random one I've done some work with in the past. I'd like to know what gets more visitation and less visitation so that I can understand if my efforts are being viewed by 1 person, 100 people, or 1,000 or some other random number in between (on a daily, weekly, or annual basis, makes no real difference). I am no technical expert, so my only gauge for these sorts of things is to use amazon's Alexa chrome extension which tells me that 80 million people visit the MAIN wiki page each day, but that does me no good for knowing the popularity/visitation of the specific pages that I've worked on and contributed to. Thanks for humoring my random question of the day! Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 21:02, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Th78blue: Hello Th! You can see the amount of times a page is viewed at pageviews.toolforge.org and all you have to do is type in the name of the page. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 21:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Th78blue Welcome to the Teahouse. Seeing how your contributions have been viewed by others is a great way of getting feedback for all one's efforts. Blaze was typically brief in their reply. So here's a bit more help for you: One good route to the link your were given is simply to click the View History tab of any article, then look for the Page Views link towards the top of the page. That takes you to the toolforge link that Blaze mentioned (see here). But you can add more than one article to that page and compare the difference in views that they get, and also change the time period displayed. By looking at your user 5,222 contributions to date (see here), I can see your a couple of your other most-edited pages, and can add these to the pageview tool. So, here is a set of your most edited articles, totalling 3/4 million page views over a 5 month period. Pretty impressive to know that even a tiny addition has been viewed so many times. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:09, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Question regarding copyright[edit] Hello! So I have a bit of an odd question regarding copyright. Now this is all theoretical (except for the image as the image does exist) but, say I have an image of a character that an artist made for me and they told me that I can use the image as much as I want as long as I give them credit and I want to use the image of Wikipedia. Would that count as being public domain or would that be some other type of copyright? As I said it's purely theoretical as, although the image I'm talking about does exist, I have no plans on using it on Wikipedia for the time being. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 21:10, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Blaze The Wolf: try WP:MCQ, that's where the experts for this stuff are. Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 21:22, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Will do! ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 21:24, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Dear whoever is going to read this.[edit] I'm trying to make a wikipedia article for my teacher, most of the information was actually collected from the man himself so it can be hard to find ways to site it. Yet I still tried my best and managed to get around 5 websites. I would very much appreciate it if the article could be accepted for around a week or even just a few days to show it to him. I understand if this is not possible but instead could you teach me how to make my article acceptable instead since I am still new here. Thank you for your time. Riverbank333 (talk) 22:21, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Riverbank333 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Wikipedia is not a place to memorialize or honor someone. Wikipedia articles summarize what independent reliable sources say about a person that meets Wikipedia's special definition of a notable person. Wikipedia does not summarize what people say about themselves. There are other websites in a wiki style with much less stringent inclusion requirements if you just want to post something on the internet about your teacher. 331dot (talk) 22:30, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I understand, thank you for responding and have a good day. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Riverbank333 (talk • contribs) 22:35, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Is there a place that's not as drastic as AfD for getting a second opinion on an article?[edit] I've been looking at Stephen_Jolly_(academic). I really don't know what to think. The article certainly looks as though he's super-important, and a quick Google-search turns up a lot more similar stuff, about how he's widely considered to be the most important commentator on things military ever to have existed. But currently all the references in his article here, bar one, are alumni/staff entries from institutions where he works/has-worked, and his LinkedIn profile. There's nothing independent to speak of. The article feels very promotional: stuff about serving two distinguished vice chancellors. I'm seeing one named fellowship, but otherwise just a lot of academic seat-hopping and popping up in think-tanks. The article has a lot of external links embedded in the text (to his start-up company, to his employer). And it also lists a publication that hasn't yet been published. The article has been written by one IP editor and one other editor, the other editor having only edited Stephen Jolly and the Barony_of_Stobo whose current holder is " The Much Hon. William Jolly", where William Jolly actually links to Stephen Jolly, sort-of suggesting this might all be a bit of an in-house edit-job. I don't feel confident to drag this to AfD because military commentary is not my area of expertise, and I think he might be terribly important. But I also get the heebie-jeebies from this article that it could also have a lot wrong with it. Is there a way to get a 2nd opinion? Elemimele (talk) 22:41, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Elemimele (talk) 22:41, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Elemimele: You might consider starting a discussion over at Wikipedia:WikiProject Military history, where they have more experience with these types of articles. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 22:51, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Timtempleton: thanks, I'll give it a try. Elemimele (talk) 06:42, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Ingleside (Amelia Courthouse, Virginia)[edit] This particular historic landmark is in the utter boondocks, easily a dozen miles on narrow, twisting country roads away from the post office that serves its address (and from the court house). To add to the potential for confusion, the farms directly across the lane are served by a different PO, also miles away on back roads. The title of the article is technically correct, but it's quite misleading for anyone not familiar with the area, and not the way local residents would refer to the spot either. In any case: Traditional and still-preferred rendering for the seat of Amelia County is "Amelia Court House", not "Courthouse". I suggest that the title be changed to Ingleside (Amelia County, Virginia). I would change it myself, but I hope it's acceptable that I'd rather not set up my own account, for a variety of reasons. 2603:6081:8004:DD5:497E:E054:AD55:9B4E (talk) 22:43, 16 November 2021 (UTC) It's unlikely that anyone volunteering at the Teahouse will be familiar with this building. Even so, we need reliable sources, not hearsay. You might start a discussion on the article talk page and ping the creator and others who have edited this in the past. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 22:47, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Welcome to the Teahouse, IP editor. You might have a point, but it's very hard to tell from the dead citation links. Personally, I'd fix those first and then propose it is named according to what the National register of Historic Places entries call it. If you think that's wrong, it's either a case for approaching the register managers to point out the error of the entry, or finding other sources which talk about it and presenting those as evidence of a better name. It took some searching, but I found this register link which doesn't mention any use as a courthouse, nor in the additional supporting PDF. So I think you're on strong ground, and a bit of more research by someone could be helpful. (I'll add the link to the talk page for someone to insert). If you happen to work in a field related to historic buildings, you're not barred from editing the article, though it could be helpful to note in any edit you make that you're connected in some way. See WP:COI for more help on this. Regards from the UK, Nick Moyes (talk) 23:41, 16 November 2021 (UTC) I've now left a note about these issues on the article talk page. See Talk:Ingleside (Amelia Courthouse, Virginia). Nick Moyes (talk) 23:50, 16 November 2021 (UTC) The Future of Wikipedia[edit] Firstly, thank you for the invitation. Due to Wikipedia relying solely on Donations - would it be a possibility that Wikipedia would ever close? I have donated and will donate to WikiMedia, but I think a fundraising option would be great, to advertise Wikipedia's need for donations internationally in person, in the streets. Just a couple of thoughts, Best Regards, StrawberryFieldsChorley StrawberryFieldsChorley (talk) 23:57, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for your donations. Wikipedia needs donations, but I haven't heard that it's particularly pressed for money. So if you have more and are feeling magnanimous, consider one of the various alternatives. (Médecins Sans Frontières seems good.) -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @StrawberryFieldsChorley As Hoary says, 'thank you'. The Wikimedia Foundation actually raises a lot more money than is required simply to meet technical support and server costs, not to mention the 12GW/h of electricity needed to meet the demands of being one of the top most-visited websites in the world. Very large amounts of money are spent in educational and outreach work, especially in the less developed parts of the world where education and access to information is so needed. So, to answer your question as to whether any of the multiple language versions of Wikipedia would ever close, on a purely funding basis, I think the answer is "no". Though, were it ever to spend, year on year, more than it brings in annually, then it could find itself having to 'draw its horns in'. The people who have actually written the content in the 6.2million+ articles on English Wikipedia are all volunteers - just as they are in the myriad of other language projects. So rest assured that your donations never end up in the pockets of us editors. We do it all for the enjoyment and the satisfaction. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:34, 17 November 2021 (UTC) All that said, though, of course Wikipedia will end one day, as will everything humans have created. "Ever" is a very long time. DS (talk) 02:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Can't disagree with that one iota! Nick Moyes (talk) 21:40, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes is right. Given the fact that Wikipedia is the 13th most visited site in the world, and the largest encyclopedia in the history of the world by more than nearly triple the amount that the second largest has, the likelihood of Wikipedia or any other language variants closing is not very great. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 14:43, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Userpage[edit] Can I create a new userpage after an admin deleted my previous userpage? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 00:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Yes you may, unless of course you do so in a way that breaks some rule or other. Previously, you used your user page for drafting an article. You're not supposed to do that. (You're welcome to do it in your "sandbox".) So feel free to restart your user page, for informing others about yourself as an editor. -- Hoary (talk) 00:07, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, thank you. But I want to clarify something, I never use my userpage for a draft article, when did I do that? But I have a draft article in my sandbox, I actually requested to delete my own userpage, but thanks a lot.—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 00:33, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, sorry, Ctrlwiki: I must have misread something. The content of your userpage was indeed deleted at your request. -- Hoary (talk) 06:01, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Wikitampering: One chart, 52 weeks[edit] There may be other Wikipedia pages with this peculiar little bit of tampering but this is the first one I've found. Every one of the links at the bottom of the page listing the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play number ones of 2005 – https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Billboard_Hot_Dance_Club_Play_number_ones_of_2005 – goes to the Billboard chart for March 28, 2020. I'm afraid to look at the pages for 2004 and 2006! Thomps2020 (talk) 01:53, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: It looks like what used to be unique URLs for those dates are now just redirecting to Billboard's chart for March 2020. I think this is something that changed on Billboard's website, not on-wiki vandalism. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 01:59, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020 I'll echo what Claudine said - Doesn't look like any malicious intent, and the page history doesn't show any vandalism :). I'm updating that article's references right now with archive links, so hopefully nobody else will get confused! Either way, good eye catching that. ThadeusOfNazerethTalk to Me! 02:41, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you, Thadeus, for going to all that trouble. If someone from Billboard really did redirect all the links, why use a chart from March of 2020? Why not have the links go to the current week's chart? Not being in the "link redirecting" business, I have no idea. Thomps2020 (talk) 05:10, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Well, I just checked the links on the page of Hot Dance Club Play number-one singles of 1992.....and 1993.....and 1994.....and 1995 – and every link goes to that same chart of March 28, 2020. Yeah, Diana Ross' "Love Hangover 2020" was number one. We know! We know! Who redirected the links – and why? Is there any way to find out? Thomps2020 (talk) 05:37, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: You would probably have to ask Billboard. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:49, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: Chipping in here, it's because as it stands that chart from March 2020 is the most recent one (the Dance Club Play chart has been suspended since that date due to COVID). So they probably changed all the links and the no-longer-working link format redirects to the latest chart, which in this case is 18 months old. Hope that makes sense..... -- ChrisTheDude (talk) 12:31, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: Organizations and companies often rework their websites for a variety of reasons, and older content gets overwritten by more recent stuff or moved to some new url address as part of that process; so, when you click on the old link, you end up getting redirected to some other page. Sometimes you can find archived versions of the old webpages via sites like the Wayback Machine and this is what ThadeusOfNazereth has gone and done; so, everything should be fine now. You can do the same as well the next time you come across a similar problem if you want, or you can use templates {{Citations broken}} or {{Dead link}} to let others know about the problem. -- Marchjuly (talk) 06:45, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Cultural Appropriation Not Right!!! From an Indigenous Lens[edit] Hot tea for you Here's a hot sandwich, too, fresh from the press. I like Wikipedia...it gives a good base of knowledge. But...as I research topics attributed to Indigenous knowledge and healing, I come across people who are making their very well endowed non-Indigenous livelihood from the riches of Indigenous knowledge...this is not right! It annoys, irritates and frustrates me that they purport to be Indigenous Chiefs or Leaders or Businesses...and really it is their thirst for the almighty dollar that leads them...this is so rampant and so...blatantly there - that these "white-privileged" people can ride on the backs of us Indigenous people!! Arghhhhhh!!!!!! What can we do about this? What is the best way to call them out and effect a positive change? Dene Woman (talk) 04:27, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Dene Woman, welcome to the Teahouse. I know it's frustrating to see injustices on Wikipedia. Please enjoy some calming tea. Could you link to the Wikipedia articles that you're referring to, so that other editors can take a look? Some things to keep in mind are WP:RIGHTGREATWRONGS–Wikipedia is not a place to right great wrongs. If there is WP:BIAS in articles, that's something else, and we can address that. Maybe you could specify what your concerns with certain articles are exactly. ––FormalDude talk 04:36, 17 November 2021 (UTC) thanks the tea Formal Dude...ahhhh...just what I needed to cool down... so was researching https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chief_Phil_Lane_Jr. and then found this source http://www.newagefraud.org/smf/index.php?topic=2731.0 that's gives a different perspective perhaps it's possible to add the additional perspective? Cheers! — Preceding unsigned comment added by ::Dene Woman (talk • contribs) 05:28, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Dene Woman: The source you gave is an online forum, which is one of the most unreliable types of sources that exists, so it's not suitable for Wikipedia (see WP:UGC). Do you have any reliable sources that provide other points of view? ––FormalDude talk 06:13, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Regardless of appropriaton — MOS:HON suggests that honorifics such as "chief" should not be used in article titles. Maproom (talk) 09:07, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The article Chief Phil Lane Jr. dates to 2013, and has had many contributors. If there is a controversy about his ancestry/background/activities that could be added, but it would need reliable source references. David notMD (talk) 11:48, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Disclaimer: I have about zero knowledge of Native Americans (demography, history, culture etc.). This being said, I read the linked forum thread and I think there is a few intertwined questions here: Whether there should be an article about Phil Lane Jr. on Wikipedia. This asks whether that person is "notable" which in turn depends on the existence of reliable sources talking/writing about him at length; while I am not impressed by the current references (non-independent sources for the most it seems), I do not have the inclination to do the required check before thinking about nominating the article for deletion. Notice that one can be notable despite, or because, one is a fraudster. Whether Phil Lane Jr. can legitimately claim to be a Native; and whether he can legitimately claim to have some rank or status (chief? medicine man? I have no idea what those terms mean) within the relevant NA community. That is not a question for Wikipedia editors; however, if there is a sourced consensus within the relevant community that he should/should not be called "chief" or whatever, this ought to be in the article. Conversely, he should not be called a "chief" or anything else without a reliable source, and "chief" should probably not be in the page title as Maproom indicated above. Whether Wikipedia should make claims pertaining to what medical practices Phil Lane supports and/or sells. For any medical claims, the heightened standard of WP:MEDRS should be followed (which likely kills 99% of medical knowledge alleged to stem from Native American practice). For claims about historical authenticity, we should still use reliable sources, which definitely excludes people trying to sell such practices (see the so-called "Tibetan singing bowls" in our article Standing bell for an example of modern fabrication). Whether Wikipedia should "call out", or otherwise take action against Phil Lane, whether as retaliation for having had a misleading/glowing article for years, or to do justice to Native Americans. Most definitely not. Even if the wrongness of one individual could be clearly established (which does not seem clear to me here), we are not in that business. Finally, what sources would be acceptable for topics pertaining to Native Americans. The potential problem is that if a fraudster is an expert at playing the Western/Anglo-Saxon media, it is easy to have "reliable sources" putting them down as a chief or writing other stuff, which would be rejected by a clear consensus within the oral tradition culture of which the fraudster claims to originate. (I count forum posts as "oral tradition" here since they are rejected as unreliable all the same). That question goes well beyond this instance, and it is hard to see what a proper fix would be. (See also Wikipedia:Systemic_bias#Availability_of_sources_may_cause_bias even though the case of oral tradition is not mentioned specifically there.) TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 16:33, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Regarding to biography page[edit] Hi, I have created a biography article of a Zyple Owner "Shanmugam Vaithiyalingam". But the page has been deleted from Wikipedia team. Please help me how can we publish again. Best Regards Zyple team ShanmugamVaithiyalingam (talk) 05:18, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @ShanmugamVaithiyalingam: The comments on your talk page tell you why this draft article was deleted, namely that Wikipedia is no place for autobiography or promotion or advertising. A Wikipedia article can be created for a person who is notable, that is, if they have received significant coverage in multiple published secondary sources that are reliable, intellectually independent of each other, and independent of the subject. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:41, 17 November 2021 (UTC) hlep me in publishing new article on laxminiya Youth club[edit] Dear sir/mam, I want to publish a new page on wikipedia. An NGO called Laxminiya Youth Club situated in Morang District of Nepal in 2018 AD is not listed in Wiki page. So i request the team to help us in publishing the page. Niteshshah24 (talk) 06:40, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Niteshshah24, and welcome to the Teahouse. The question is whether the youth club meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability: roughly, have several people, unconnected with the club, chosen to write about it in some depth in reliably published sources? For most youth clubs, the answer is, No, and so no article about them is possible. If the club does meet the criteria, then it is possible that there could be an article about it; but the next problem is getting such an article written. There is no "team": there are thousands and thousands of volunteer editors, who work on what they choose. In theory, you could make a request at requested articles; but in practice, the likelihood of an editor picking the request up is small. It is possible that if you posted at WT:WikiProject Nepal there might be somebody interested in working with you; but no guarantees. Your best chance of getting an article written (assuming the club is notable in Wikipedia's sense) is to write it yourself. But writing an article is much harder than it looks, and I always advise new editors who are thinking of creating an article to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" of editing Wikipedia, by working on improving some of our six million articles. Finally, I need to point out that if you have any connection with the youth club, then you have a conflict of interest: this doesn't forbid you from writing an article about it, but it makes it even harder, as you are likely to find it difficult to write in a neutral way. (Remember that Wikipedia is basically not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say, but only in what unconnected people have chosen to publish about it). If you are in any sort of paid role in connection with the club, then you must make formal declarations as a paid editor. To summarise - if you have come here to help build Wikipedia, you are welcome. If you have come here to tell the world about your youth club, you are better off doing it somewhere else than Wikipedia. --ColinFine (talk) 10:17, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Shyam Sunder Jyani[edit] FYI?– Removed leading spaces – ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) Hello there, I am new with Wikipedia community. When I made first edit on a Wikipedia article, I was on cloud nine. After that, I made few other minor changes. I submitted an article to publish. The page url is https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Shyam_Sunder_Jyani . Unfortunately, it has not been accepted and declined. The person whom I wrote article has a significant coverage on print media, online media and with few Govt. official websites. Could you guide me how should I provide accurate and reliable information so that if it get approved if it meets with wikipedia guidelines? I also want to learn best practices of wikipedia. Best, Jakhar Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:52, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: The links in the decline message tell you what you need to do to show that the subject of this article is notable – provide reliable, independent, secondary sources, and cite them using Wikipedia's referencing methods. Verifiability tells you why it's important to add sources to articles and how you can identify reliable sources. Your first source, a faculty profile from the professor's college, would probably be considered a self-published source, and besides, it doesn't say why he is notable. I am not certain whether India Today would be considered reliable (see discussion at § India Today or IndiaToday.com) but even if it is, you would need more than one good source. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) FYI?– Fixed indentation per WP:THREAD – ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) Thank you ClaudineChionh so much for your prompt response and teaching me about reliable sources. Yes, there are few reliable sources are available. Below are the few sources where about him and his initiative is covered in this year. Could you help me out if these are the reliable source? https://www.unccd.int/actionsland-life-programme/land-life-award-2021-healthy-land-healthy-livesBe https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/rajasthan-women-vow-to-nurture-green-family/article34862254.ece https://www.dw.com/en/familial-forestry-in-india-caring-for-trees-like-theyre-family/a-59215321 https://www.unccd.int/news-events/2021-land-life-award-winner-familial-forestry https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CgYwtwGedxg Thank you and I patiently waiting for your further guidance. Jakhar Singh — Preceding unsigned comment added by Jakhar Singh (talk • contribs) 09:35, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Please keep replies threaded by indenting your reply with a colon at the start, and sign your reply adding four tildes (~~~~) at the end. You can enable the Discussion Tools beta feature to indent and sign your replies automatically on talk pages – look for this in Preferences. As to your sources: WP:RSP is a good place to start looking for discussions and consensus on the reliability of many sources. The Hindu: generally yes Deutsche Welle (DW): It's not in the table but archived discussions suggest yes United Nations agencies: It depends on the topic and the agency (see discussion at § Is the United Nations a Reliable Source?) – specific sources should be discussed on the article/draft talk page. YouTube: usually no — Preceding unsigned comment added by ClaudineChionh (talk • contribs) 10:12, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you ClaudineChionh for teaching me. I will look for the sources you suggested. For a new article, Would it be good if just brief about the object in few lines (e.g. 3-5 lines) so it can be approved easily and then subsequent edits can be made? The article which I am writing, he is a Govt. college Professor and apart from his teaching job, he works for environment and society so could I use the phrases like environmentalist and social worker? Could you teach me what needs to keep in mind while writing a first article for best practices? Best Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:38, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Every fact or descriptive phrase you use must be supported by reliable sources. You can read about the steps to create an article, though as I am not an article reviewer, I am not the best person to ask for advice on this process. You are strongly advised to read your first article as well, and it's also a very good idea to spend some time on other tasks here before creating a new article, which is one of the more difficult tasks in Wikipedia. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Experimenting With Country Data Templates[edit] I apologize if this was the wrong place to ask this question, but I did not know where else to ask. So, you know how there are sandboxes for users to experiment? What if I wanted to experiment with Country Data templates? Like, say I wanted to change the flag that would show up for a country when using the flag template(s) (Just as an experiment, not a permanent change to the actual template page). Is there a way to go about doing that, and if so, how would I go about doing that? Karl Malone the Mailman (talk) 07:41, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Karl Malone the Mailman, you might find useful information at Help:Template. --ColinFine (talk) 10:21, 17 November 2021 (UTC) You would use the Sandbox associated to the template. Any changes made would be reflected in the testcases page for that template. - X201 (talk) 10:34, 17 November 2021 (UTC) BPL[edit] How can I find BLP articles that does not have a talk page. I want to create a talk page for them. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:18, 17 November 2021 (UTC) You probably don't need to! The idea of talk pages isn't to talk about the subject of the page (i.e. the talk page for Boris_Johnson isn't there so people can express their views on Johnson, his politics and life). Talk pages are there only as a venue for editors to discuss changes to the article. You will see that Boris Johnson's talk page is a mish-mash of discussions of protection against vandalism, whether to capitalise Prime Minister, complaints about unreferenced text, and discussions about whether certain events should be mentioned in the associated article or not. This is quite typical. So there's no point in having a talk page until a couple of editors have something to talk about - at which point it will be created automatically, as soon as the first editor decides to post to it. Elemimele (talk) 11:35, 17 November 2021 (UTC) new round of discussions regarding the controversy section in the "Our Lady of Fátima" page[edit] I have started a new round of discussions with Spyrazzle regarding the controversy section in the "Our Lady of Fátima" page i hope senior editors will keep an eye on the talk page arbitrate fairly between us, the last time i was banned unfairly for 36 hours by herecomesjamie for adding material not sourced, which is ironic because in fact i did source the material i added and it is the same exact sources Spyrazzle used to build his controversy section, if they were good to build the section why are they not good for a rebutel? anyways please help keep this fair and professional, Thank you all — Preceding unsigned comment added by Fadi153 (talk • contribs) 10:01, 17 November 2021 (UTC)  Courtesy link: Our Lady of Fátima ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 10:15, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Fadil53. Dispute resolution explains the steps you should follow to try to resolve disputes. These steps do not include posting repeatedly at the Teahouse. --ColinFine (talk) 10:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Repinging Fadi153 --ColinFine (talk) 10:23, 17 November 2021 (UTC) If you cannot resolve the dispute through discussion with the other editor, you may request participation from uninvolved, interested editors to build consensus for your changes. Several venues are available, listed below, to find editors who may be able to assist. Participation in dispute resolution is voluntary and no one is required to participate. However, discussion can still proceed and consensus may be reached without the non-participating editor's input. Administrators and the community may take into consideration the degree and nature of an editor's participation in dispute resolution when deciding if an editor's activities are productive. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Fadi153 (talk • contribs) 11:43, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Fadi153: That text is a quote from the Dispute resolution page, and I'm not quite sure how it is relevant. The Teahouse is not one of the "several venues" listed on the page. Starting one Teahouse discussion about the article, to get advice on the situation, would have been fine, but this is the fourth thread started by one or another of the editors involved in the dispute. What you need to do is discuss the topic and the sourcing, but not the other editor(s) or their beliefs, on the article talk page. This is done to arrive at a consensus about the article content. If you don't get a consensus (either for or against what you, personally, think is the "right" version), the various options for dispute resolution are outlined on the page Colin Fine linked. Previous Teahouse threads about the article Our Lady of Fátima over the past few weeks: here, here, here, and this thread. --bonadea contributions talk 13:04, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy fact: the admin who blocked Fadi153 was actually Ohnoitsjamie, not "herecomesjamie". Bishonen | tålk 19:55, 17 November 2021 (UTC). Follow-up to How to write about a "Group of companies" in wikipedia[edit] How to write about a company in wikipedia. Marytwist (talk) 10:46, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Marytwist: Is there already an article about the company on Wikipedia? If so, you can usually edit the article, but make sure you understand the basic rules of Wikipedia, including the conflict of interest rules, if they apply to you. If the article doesn't already exist, does the company meet the criteria for notability? If so, then see the advice on writing your first article. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 11:03, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The archive link already has general advice. Do you now have a specific question and, if so, please tell us which draft or article you are referring to? Most of your actual additions to Wikipedia articles so far have been reverted. Please read carefully the links supplied above. Mike Turnbull (talk) 11:26, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Problems with submission[edit] Goodmorning, I wrote an article about Microwave Barriers & Sensors (here there is the link to the page https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Bistatic_Microwave_barrier) and was rejected because it "reads more like an advertisement than an entry in an encyclopedia" and it doesn't express a neutral point of view. I am writing here to ask to someone more expert than me, if could please help me understanding this problem and what I need to change: as sources I used official papers and documents from National Institutes and Departments and I have no connections to it, so from my point of view I believed the article is supported by reliable references and sources. Could an editor have a look at it and help me finding any outstanding issues that should be resolved? Thanks in advance for your time and suppor Annaas98 (talk) 10:47, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Welcome to the Teahouse, Annaas98. There are some significant problems here. The first is that from reading the introduction, I have no idea what your draft article is actually about. It might be helpful for you to read MOS:LEADSENTENCE. I also see lots of sentences that aren't supported with references, and recommendations (such as "For a better and more reliable detection the zone should be free of obstructions, bushes, and the grass should be kept cut. It is recommended to use a gravel surface since water is better drained than in the grass."), which don't belong in a Wikipedia article, per WP:NOTGUIDE. Cordless Larry (talk) 11:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) For another concrete example, the very first sentence of that draft (as of now) is The anti-intrusion systems based on microwave are the most reliable. That is absolutely not a sentence that should be anywhere in the article, let alone the introduction, let alone unsupported by any reference whatsoever. Would you imagine the sentence "X was the most patriotic of US presidents" in a biography of a politician? No, because "patriotic" (like "reliable") is quite a vague word; and further, such a statement would need to either be supported by the consensus of reliable sources (unlikely) or attributed ("according to their vice-president, X was the most patriotic president"). TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 13:57, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Image size[edit] Hello. How can I size an image in percentage? I want to size an image 100%. Thank you. Richard M William (talk) 11:24, 17 November 2021 (UTC) See H:PICTURE for the general guide on images. Make sure you preview the page you are editing before saving/publishing it, so the effect is as you intended. If you still have problems, repost here with a link to the page and image filename you are working with, Richard M William. Mike Turnbull (talk) 11:31, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Question about Draft:Ezekiel Clark[edit] Can someone take me on a step-to-step guide on fixing the problem for Draft:Ezekiel Clark and Draft:Jelle Sels? I just want to make sure my article is accepted, with all the problems fixed. (Both are declined, of course) Also, the article I submitted did not qualify for an article.  Severestorm28 (talk) 12:19, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Severestorm28: welcome to the Teahouse. Both drafts are about tennis players, and both of them were declined for not showing that the person is notable, as Wikipedia defines notability. A person is considered to be notable, in general, if there is significant coverage of them, that is, if multiple reliable, secondary sources independent of the person have written about them (not simply mentioned their names, but written in some detail). Tennis players may also be considered notable if they meet the criteria that are outlined here. In both Draft:Ezekiel Clark and Draft:Jelle Sels, the only sources are their pages on results/rankings websites, which means that you have not showed that there is significant coverage about either of them. Unless they meet the criteria for tennis players, it is very unlikely that they are notable. That is not a problem that can be fixeed, I'm afraid. More information here about notability for tennis players. Regards, --bonadea contributions talk 12:41, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Bonadea: If so, then how did my Draft:Brandon Holt get published? I don't get the differences for each draft I wrote. Severestorm28 (talk) 13:29, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I think the best person to discuss that with would be Greenman, the reviewer who accepted the draft, on their user talk page. Maybe the draft about Holt simply showed more clearly that he is notable – I don't know very much about the special notability requirements for tennis players, that's why I linked them above instead of trying to summarise them. Regards, --bonadea contributions talk 13:48, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Bonadea: Thanks for your responses. This is very useful, and will solve my problem. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:59, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Shortcut Button for reply[edit] It is very disgusting to reply to long conversations, by using edit source. I have heard that there is a button beside the last reply labelled as'reply', and on clicking that one can easily add the reply. Please tell me to make that setting. And thanks again, for answering so many of my questions. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Wow, "disgusting" is a rather strong word! But I think what you're looking for is Discussion Tools, in Preferences > Beta features. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 13:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionhThanks a lot, you helped me a lot. Yes 'disgusting' is a bad word, I know, but it sometimes gets irritating when I have to scroll all done the edit source section and then add equivalent (:::::) and then write what I want to do. By using that beta feature, I can easily reply. Any suggestions on auto signing, I sometimes tend to forget to sign. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:14, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Discussion Tools will also sign your replies automatically. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Teahouse Archive[edit] Some hours ago, a bot came on my talk page and told me that one of my question had been archived. I see that there are many archives in Teahouse. I am in need of the conversation I had in that question, but I cannot find it. Please tell me a way, to find archived questions in Teahouse. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:24, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Below the Table of Contents box is a list of the most recent archives, and a search box. If you type your username in that box, it should find all discussions you have been involved in (unless you forgot to sign!) --bonadea contributions talk 13:37, 17 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Itcouldbepossible, there isn't a way to continue a discussion that's already been archived, but you can continue the discussion again by making another post here. Remember to link to the post so we know what you are referring to; you can do so with this special hyperlink below: [[Wikipedia:Teahouse/Questions/Archive (X)#(Name of header)|link]] I do believe I found your question though. It's helpful to know when searching that archived questions are most likely in the most recent number or the one before it. If not, you can search for the name of your questions in the "Search Archives" box: Wikipedia:Teahouse/Questions/Archive 1131#Edits Panini!? 13:43, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Actually, the bot notification includes a link to the archive and precise section. The most recent such notification for the OP points to Wikipedia:Teahouse/Questions/Archive_1130#Reliable_Sources. The fact that the OP read the archival notice but failed to see the link makes me think that the notification template is defective; I will ask for feedback at their talk page. TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 14:06, 17 November 2021 (UTC) In the notification from the bot, it said "You can still find the archived discussion here"; in that sentence, the word "here" is in blue, indicating that it is a wikilink to the thread in question. --David Biddulph (talk) 15:19, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph When a link is piped to a short word, "here", it is quite easy to miss, I believe it could be improved by piping the phrase "archived discussion here" just like you did with "notification from the bot". Roger (Dodger67) (talk) 16:34, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Notability of Troom Troom[edit] Is Troom Troom notable? I'm wondering if it is or not. I've previously been told my article does not have enough sources, but also that Troom Troom could potentially warrant an article. It definitely impacts the culture of YouTube, reacting to content in a similar vein has been a trend on the platform for quite some time now. Could anybody who has heard of Troom Troom give their input? Thanks. KawaiiManiac (talk) 13:58, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The general consensus for YouTube content creators seems to be "no". Please read WP:NYOUTUBE and you'll see why. There may be exceptions but the challenge will be to meet the notability guidelines. Mike Turnbull (talk) 14:54, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Article for Creation: Van Romaine[edit]  Courtesy link: Draft:Van Romaine I have been working on and editing an article for creation on the subject, Van Romaine. The original author's submittals, and now mine as well, focus pretty clearly on notability as the primary reason for rejecting the work. The article is biographical of a living person, and I do understand and appreciate the higher standards applied per Wikipedia's Notability article. I am both frustrated and confused, for a few reasons. I hope someone can address my questions in regard. First of all (and perhaps a bit ashamedly, as it seems somewhat juvenile), I have reviewed many published articles, under the same category (drummers) that have either dubious references, minimal references, or the same reference sites that I cited in my article. I am struggling to understand how some articles are accepted with so little substance, while my efforts are being denied. Is there any value to be gained by noting the articles I found that have these inferior references? Secondly, because the subject is of an age where the available references themselves are in a transitional phase; many having been originally published in print and archives online may not be available, and access to hard copies may be inaccessible due to cost, how should I proceed? Is it my obligation to spend money for access to reference material that may not even be accepted by the editing cadre? Thirdly, as the subject is a musician, his notoriety, impact and importance is subjective by nature. There are no metrics per se that define how or who is "worthy" of biography; other than the body of work that can attributed to the subject. We can not use words to define the unique styles, technical prowess or creative processes incorporated by an artist better than presenting available recordings, both in audio or video. All the words in the world can not do justice to describing a painting by Van Gogh; but one gaze (especially in person) transcends all that can not be described. In this subject case, there is a wealth of available audio and video of performances online. Does this trove carry no weight in establishing notability? Thanks in advance for your assistance and direction as to how I should re-examine this article. Terre Hominum (talk) 15:01, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Terre Hominum! You are asking questions that relate to the most fundamental principles of Wikipedia, so no doubt others will also want to address aspects of them. I'll try to get the ball rolling by responding to your points briefly. Firstly: a great many Wikipedia articles do not match up to current standards. Some were first created years ago when the standards were lower, others were created directly as articles without going through a Draft stage requiring independent review before becoming articles. Our essay sometimes referred to as WP:OTHERSTUFFEXISTS discusses why one should not rely on existing, possibly substandard articles to justify a similar one; where possible, only take as exemplars articles that have been rated as at least GA, if not FA. It is quite acceptable to flag up articles that you perceive as substandard, either by adding templates such as [citation needed] to unsubstantiated and contestible statements, by mentioning them to other editors, or by nominating them for deletion; however, the initial aim should usually be to improve articles (for example, by finding better references) rather than getting them expunged. Secondly: no, neither you nor anybody else are obliged to spend money, because this is a 100% volunteer project, but Wikipedia has a great many active editors, and no deadlines, so between them they can usually collaborate through Wikipedia Projects or other means to access most reference sources. Wikipedia is a collaborative project, and no praise accrues to an individual for having produced a new article solely by their own efforts. Thirdly: Notability is never measured by a subject's subjective "worth" or by the size and/or "quality" (who judges) of their body of work in itself, but almost solely by the extent to which reliable sources, independently of them, have published material of substantial length about them. For specific types of subject, there can be additional guidelines that lay down measurable metrics to aid assessment; those most applicable here can be found at Wikipedia:Notability (music). Hope this helps. {The poster formerly known as 87.81.230.195} 90.205.225.31 (talk) 15:47, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Terre Hominum To add a bit about notability in the sense that we mean it here. To use the example of Vincent van Gogh that you mentioned, he is not considered notable because of the brilliance of his paintings or the exquisiteness of his brush strokes. We have an article about him only because many people (who mostly never met him and were not even born when he cut off his ear) have written at great length and detail - enough to fill entire libraries - about him and his work. This is what we mean by independent and reliable sources. Now of course we don't expect every article subject to be the topic of whole libraries, but we do require that a few such sources do exist. Roger (Dodger67) (talk) 16:24, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Terre Hominum: I will add a few points to the other good responses above. First, brevity will aid your readers and correspondents, both in talk pages and in articles. In particular, breaking up your "wall of text" into separate paragraphs for each point would have made it much more readable. Who knows how many readers scrolled past your post because it looked too intimidating? Second, we unfortunately cannot (usually) cite or include audio recordings made by living musicians, both because they are primary sources and because we do not include copyrighted non-free content. But, third, many volunteers such as myself do have professional expertise in locating good secondary sources, and are willing to help locate or provide sources under fair-dealing conditions for the purpose of improving Wikipedia articles. Visit the resource exchange to learn more. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 22:33, 17 November 2021 (UTC) PLEAS HELP ME, i cant not publish my draft[edit]  Warnerbrok (talk) 16:03, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I have added the appropriate information to allow you to submit the draft for review. New users cannot directly create articles. 331dot (talk) 16:09, 17 November 2021 (UTC) But I do not believe that User:Warnerbrok/sandbox has any chance of being accepted at present, Warnerbrok, because most of the references do not meet the criteria of being reliable sources, independent of the subject, and having significant coverage of the subject: several of them do not mention him in any way. Please read WP:YFA carefully. Have you a connection with Cartier? If you have, you should declare your conflict of interest, and if you are in any way paid to create this article, or it is part of your job, then you must declare your status as a paid editor. Note that I have also tagged the image as not having a satisfactory source (the es-wiki article is emphatically not the source of the picture) and I am dubious whether it has been validly licensed. --ColinFine (talk) 17:29, 17 November 2021 (UTC) How to create click to drop down segments of an article?[edit] I would like to know how to create one of those click-to-drop-down aspects of an article? I would like to make this page (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sharksploitation) more accessible. People can choose to view the films by release order or alphabetical order or alphabetical for the first film with it's sequels below it. As it is now I need to use Ctrl-f to find what I am looking for Simdude1990 (talk) 16:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Do you mean a sortable table? Help:Table has a lot of information about how to create and format tables. Or do you mean "collapsed" content, where you can hide or show part of the content on a page? That's usually not recommended for articles – there is some information about it here. --bonadea contributions talk 16:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990: – I didn't manage to ping you the first time... --bonadea contributions talk 16:32, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I mean the collapsed segments. I am thinking something like the following Films in Alphabetical order (collapsed) Films in Alphabetical and Sequel order (collapsed) Films by Genre/type (collapsed) Films in release order (standard article, non-collapsible) - Although I will probably invert the list and separate it by year (or group of years eg 1980-1985, 2000's etc.)--Simdude1990 (talk) 16:44, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990: Welcome to the Teahouse. Like Bonadea said, collapsible content generally shouldn't be collapsed per the Manual of Style. Perhaps sortable tables would work better for you? —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 19:55, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990 Firstly, there genuinely isn't enough content in that page to warrant any collapsing/hiding; I can't imagine why on earth you'd think there is? I do, however, agree with @Tenryuu, and feel that a sortable table would allow users to sort these films by year or by title, or by anything else you felt inclined to add. But that would only merit being collapsible were there some other content worthy of bringing to the fore, but I don't see any on this topic. (An example of a very lengthy article that I created which can have its one table hidden to make the whole page more viewable can be found here). Secondly, I really fail to understand why this page exists under that title. Surely it would be better as a List article (e.g. List of sharksploitation films). Nick Moyes (talk) 01:01, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for your input, a sortable table seems like the way to go, I didn't know they existed. I intend on including a lot of other films that are missing from the list, when they are included I'm sure it will be quite large. I may change it to a list page, however, myself or others may add other information that would make it no longer just a list. Some of the films to add don't have Wikipedia pages, they all have IMDB pages or foreign wikis see here for an example. Is it ok to link to those from the movie title? or would it be better to have this (IMDB) next to the corresponding film? or no link except for in the references?--Simdude1990 (talk) 10:55, 18 November 2021 (UTC) List articles on Wikipedia should contain items that still abide by Wikipedia's content policies, particularly verifiablilty and notability. Generally that means that each film should have its own English Wikipedia article (I specify English because other languages tend to have less strict content policies and guidelines); IMDb and foreign wikis aren't acceptable as they are for the most part user-generated, which trashes verifiability. Lists aren't expected to be exhaustive. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 17:07, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Can a short blurb selling a book be a source?[edit] For the article Robert Fraser (art dealer) I was considering using https://pallantbookshop.com/product/groovy-bob-the-life-and-times-of-robert-fraser/ as a source for his being promiscuous homosexual. Greg Dahlen (talk) 16:54, 17 November 2021 (UTC) How would you be using it? In general, I would think a controversial statement such as that in a person's biography article would need much more than marketing copy from a publisher. But the book itself could probably be used as a source for elements of his character such as that, when relevant. I think we need more information on what you're hoping to add and where. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 17:07, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Probably not. Such a blurb establishes no useful information other than that the book exists. --Jayron32 17:11, 17 November 2021 (UTC) A blurb is not written by the author, so cannot be reliably credited; and it may change in different editions (or be lost altogether with the dustjacket) so it cannot be reliably verified. And I would never trust a blurb to reflect a book's content accurately; they are a marketing tool designed to sell the book, not summarise it.--Verbarson (talk) 20:23, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Muckrock for government materials[edit] Hi, I'm repairing some dead links at Elan School, and one specific citation to a report by the Maine Department of Education seems to be a completely dead link. I could not find it on a web archive or the current Maine DoE website. However, I did find a list of the reports on Muckrock. I was wondering if it's kosher to substitute the dead link with a link to MuckRock and how I should cite that, since I couldn't find precedent for this. Thanks! LatakiaHill (talk) 17:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @LatakiaHill: It looks as though that particular report—number 90302—is here at the Muckrock site (scroll to top of that page). To cite it, I'd just use {{Cite web}}, filling in that URL, the title "Basic School Approval Report Pertaining to the Elan School", and other relevant fields. If the reference is just to show that Elan's program was a year-round one, that bit of info can be found on page 3 of the report. Deor (talk) 17:59, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks @Deor:! I appreciate it. Efn template not working properly[edit] Hello! So I'm working on changing the template for the map DLC on Euro Truck Simulator 2 and I'm trying to add an efn to explain the reason for a country being listed as being part of a DLC it technically wasn't released in, however when I try adding it the efn character displays however what's inside the efn doesn't display if I hover over it and it's not below the references section like it normally would be. It's in User:Blaze The Wolf/sandbox 2. What exactly am I doing wrong here? ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 17:48, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Blaze The Wolf: You need a {{notelist}} to make the efn notes work. I added one here. DuncanHill (talk) 17:58, 17 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Thanks DuncanHill for fixing it! I swear sometimes the efn would automatically add the notelist but I could be wrong. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 17:59, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Adding entries to authority control template with wikidata[edit] How do I add an entry to the authority control list on my article using wikidata? Thanks Trillkat (talk) 19:45, 17 November 2021 (UTC) What to do about unsourced, promotional, biographical articles?[edit] Hi, I recently came across the article Fayez Barakat while browsing recent changes. The article has mostly been edited by users that only write about Fayez Barakat, has no citations, and the two references with ISBNs seem to be published by a company that has only published books on Fayez Barakat. It contains plenty of unsourced direct quotes, and passages such as: "He is best known as one of the world's most important collectors and dealers of ancient art"; "At the age of 14 Barakat was offered a Fulbright Scholarship to study medicine in the United States on account of his remarkable aptitude for absorbing and understanding information" [seems extremely unlikely]; "Barakat remarks that 'our mind cannot penetrate the mystery of the Universe. We know that the number of galaxies is endless, and we try to listen with the ears of our soul the music they make moving across the infinite skies'. He looks at the universe and at the multitude of galaxies and constellations with a subliminal and telepathic telescope, seeing those eternal lights moving across the infinite through the intuitive eye of his heart. He tries to evade the boundaries of this galaxy through the intuitive dimension, breaking through the limits of space and time, and see the entirety of the infinite and of the eternal. In doing so, he fuses himself into the quantum field, into the energy moving the universe on a sub-atomic and global level. The energy the artist impresses on the canvas is the one that permeates his soul, intellect, senses and instincts, and merges into the energy which animates and moves the universe."; and so on. What do I do about this? It seems to me that the entire article should be deleted for a complete lack of sources or anything establishing notability. But how do I proceed to do this? Do I just start a proposal for deletion? Should I post on the Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons/Noticeboard to get someone more experienced to look it over, or is there something else that would be the best course of action? Thanks in advance for any help! Knuthove (talk) 20:19, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Knuthove (talk) I looked at Fayez Barakat and see it is now tagged as having multiple issues. In addition, the talk page has a new Conflict of Interest tag. Thank you for bringing this to the attention of other editors. Karenthewriter (talk) 22:39, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Knuthove, Never be afraid to remove unverified info, especially puffery of this kind. - hako9 (talk) 22:44, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Knuthove Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. I see that a number of editors have now tagged the article with their concerns, and I have personally removed swathes of uncited trivia and promotional text, and warned the IP editor about declaring a conflict of interest Assuming you are motivated to take action yourself, you could look for online sources yourself to decide whether or not this person meets our Notability Criteria for living people. The page called WP:BEFORE outlines the steps one should take prior to putting an article forward for deletion. I note there are various sources listed, though the one I did search out (see here) is clearly a self-published gallery catalogue. Maybe others are too, though some of the claims in the article (if true) do suggest he might well be notable. So some further investigation would be helpful, and then perhaps a post at WP:BLP/N could be merited if its still not clear. I hope this helps, and thanks for raising your question here. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:47, 17 November 2021 (UTC) It has now been stripped down to a mere stub, citing three sources. This may look promising, until one realizes that all three are only interviews. (I'm surprised that WP:RS doesn't mention interviews; all that I can find in a hurry is Wikipedia:Interviews, which is merely a somewhat waffly essay.) -- Hoary (talk) 23:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I looked for Fayez Barakat on Google and found his Wikipedia article and numerous Fayez Barakat generated cites. Then I went to newspapers.com and found one article (https://www.newspapers.com/image/148931789/?terms=%22Fayez%20Barakat%22&match=1) about the art dealer allegedly buying stolen items. He does not seem to have much media coverage. Karenthewriter (talk) 01:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you all for your comments and editing! I see that the article now is just about what I would have made it if I had removed the unsourced parts myself rather than ask about it here. The reason I didn't do that was because I thought the article might simply be deleted instead. Reading your comments, it seems to me that the question is whether the interviews now listed as sources are enough to establish notability, and if any other sources can be found. I am skeptical that these interviews are independent enough, and seeing how hard finding other sources appears to be, it doesn't look good. I'll go through the steps in WP:BEFORE and see about starting my first AfD discussion eventually. Knuthove (talk) 14:14, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Notability References[edit] Where and how do I enter notability references in my new Wikipedia article? CorpTool (talk) 22:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) CorpTool (talk) 22:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @CorpTool Welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for declaring your COI with regard this article. You need to find in-depth sources that are independent of the subject and which are not part of the insider news community (ecosystem) that this company works in. Use only the factual statements in those sources as the basis of the article. Right now, it's seems pretty obvious you are probably being paid to promote this article on Wikipedia because the marketing speak oozes out of every single sentence. See WP:PAID to explicitly declare who is paying you. To be frank, it's wholly unacceptable as an encyclopaedia article right now. So, cut out 9/10ths of the article's current content and present facts that establish Notability based purely upon just those key sources. Read WP:NCORP to learn more. If you feel you've already included the best sources, just link to the top three in any reply you make here and we'll take a quick look at them. I for one am not prepared to wade through dozens of probable press releases and trade magazine links to attempt to ascertain notability. I hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 23:05, 17 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Hello, CorpTool. I'm afraid that your question is like "Where and how do I build foundations for the house I have just put up?" If you write a single statement without having a reliable source wholly independent of the subject for the information in that statement, you are probably wasting your time (and other people's). In respect of Draft:Confiant Inc. I would say on a quick scan that at least three quarters of the draft should be removed, as it is pure marketing copy. Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. When you have found these independent sources, you then need to forget basically everything you know about Confiant, and write exclusively from what those independent sources say (and don't forget to include any substantial criticisms they have). An even better use of your time would be to put this project aside for at least six months while you "learn the trade" of editing Wikipedia by working on improving some of our six million articles unrelated to your COI. --ColinFine (talk) 23:07, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Also, Wikipedia:No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability is a good essay on some of the related problems here. --Jayron32 13:37, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the input. CorpTool (talk) 16:53, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Any advice on editing?[edit] Hello I am more used to welcoming new users however yesterday I was told by an admin I should not welcome new users due to be being new to wikipedia, I have done other edits such as spell checks but other then that I am not really a good editor does anyone have advice on editing? The furret lover (talk) 22:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @The furret lover: Thank you for wanting to help Wikipedia! I'm sorry you were given a bit of a scolding, but welcoming new users who have not edited articles really isn't one of the higher-priority tasks. TASKS gives you a range of general tasks, in order of difficulty; make sure you read and understand the policies, guidelines, and methods in the "More information" column before diving into a task. You may find it useful to add articles and topics that interest you to your Watchlist and reading the Talk/Discussion pages of interesting articles to see the process of improving articles. You also say you are in school, so it would also be a good idea to read Guidance for younger editors. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 22:55, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Okay thanks! The furret lover (talk) 23:33, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Citation vs link[edit] In this sentence "The United States operated a command missile system known as the Emergency Rocket Communications System (ERCS)." I could cite this page or I could put a link to it on "Emergency Rocket Communications System". Which would be the right approach? Wagsters (talk) 22:40, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Wagsters. A citation should contain bibliographic information to allow a reader (anywhere, anytime) to be able to obtain the source, and ideally also to evaluate the likely value to doing so. What's needed for this is things such as title, date, author, publication. A link to a copy of the reference is a convenience, not usually an essential part of the citation. So the answer that you should cite ie (eg using {{cite report}}) providing the URL as one of the parameters. --ColinFine (talk) 23:14, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Accidental creation of a page[edit] I accidentally created a Wikipedia page, how can I delete it or ask for it to be deleted? Michaelocow (talk) 22:45, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Michaelocow Welcome to the Teahouse. To delete a page you have created that nobody else has significantly edited, you can request 'speedy deletion' under criterion G7. To do this, click 'edit source' and place the following text at the very top of the page: {{Db-self}} and publish your changes. This should display the speedy deletion template and call the attention of an admin, such as myself, to delete it for you. (Make sure you don't include any extraneous 'nowiki' words that you might see in chevron brackets. I've only used that here to ensure that this page doesn't get deleted!) Nick Moyes (talk) 23:14, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Who are the authors? AFD and step 4 trying to bundle article[edit] Hello, first time nominating AFD, i'm at step 3, where i should let the authors know, do they mean the creator of the article or someone else? Step 3 @Wikipedia:Articles for deletion  Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 23:04, 17 November 2021 (UTC) If there are any major contributors, they would be the relevant parties. You can use the article's edit history to see if anyone has been making significant contributions to it and let them know. ??????? ? 23:09, 17 November 2021 (UTC) The page history tool gives you statistics about how much various users contributed, and when they did. I would then visit the user pages of the biggest contributors and notify those who are currently active (have edited anything within the last year). ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 23:11, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh: Thank you! Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 23:28, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I quote: most of the articles in relies articles rely on deprecated source (Atlas of the humanitarian situation) is specific to each particular incident. I can't parse this, Dawit S Gondaria. Perhaps there's something wrong with me, but I suspect that this needs rewording. -- Hoary (talk) 23:45, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Oops, thanks for pointing that out @Hoary:, Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 23:52, 17 November 2021 (UTC) most of the articles in rely on deprecated source (Atlas of the humanitarian situation): this still baffles me. I first understood it as "most of the article relies on a single deprecated source (Atlas of the humanitarian situation)"; but as I wasn't sure, I thought I'd take a look. The previous AfD talks of application to 107 articles (I think it was), yet doesn't seem to list the other 106. It's all rather confusing. Particularly surprising is that you're starting this AfD just one day after the previous AfD closed. This is understandable, given that the previous AfD was closed on "procedural" grounds; however, you're likely to get impatient reactions. You'd be wise to reword your nomination to make it easier to understand. I think you're free to do this until it gets its first comment (quasi-vote): once it gets any comments, you shouldn't continue to tamper with the nomination but should instead use additional comments (but you should be sparing with these). -- Hoary (talk) 00:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: another user launched the first AFD and included a dozen articles that have wide coverage in the media, this is why it ended in a procedural keep, but there seemed to be a consensus that Atlas is a unreliable source, so i'm making sure to add articles a batch of 25 first(after doing a before check) that relies on the Atlas. Thank you, after the first comment, i won't be tampering with nominations. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 01:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/2020 May Kado massacre (2nd nomination) i have not transcluded correctly, is there something i must do, or is it fixed by the bot? Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 23:42, 17 November 2021 (UTC) It's fixed. -- Hoary (talk) 00:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) How to link up/bundle AFD deletion discussion with related pages[edit] Help!, on the Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/2020 May Kado massacre (2nd nomination) i added the related pages, but the related pages for example Megab massacre doesn't show/link with the deletion discussion page of the latter. What do i have to do to link related pages to the deletion discussion page? I tried to do step 3, then show preview, it doesn't link to the deletion discussion page, then i tried afdx then preview, doesn't come up right either Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 02:25, 18 November 2021 (UTC) The markup for a template starts with two consecutive "{"; it must also end with two consecutive "}". -- Hoary (talk) 02:40, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: i know i couldn't do it here, but if i follow the guideline, and change or replace the current Afd message in Megab massacre, it will show an error. Can you please link it up to the deletion discussion page, so that i can learn from the diff? Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 02:57, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Dawit S Gondaria, Megab massacre is linked properly to the AfD. A number of other pages are also to be discussed in that AfD; I clicked on one of them at random (Addi Esher massacre), and found that it too is linked properly to the AfD. -- Hoary (talk) 05:26, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Ginger?[edit] Hi, on the current Ginger wiki page, it really doesn't have any clear distinct info on the actual variety of ginger out there [1] or the positive effects reported by systematic reviews. Is that meant to be normal and is it acceptable to add them in including systematic reviews that explains the positive found effects? From sources like https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7019938/? TheUntamedBig (talk) 02:04, 18 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.producebluebook.com/know-your-commodity/ginger-root/ @TheUntamedBig: Welcome to the Teahouse! The best place for this question is the talk page of the relevant article, which in this case is Talk:Ginger. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 02:30, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the tip. But I was also hoping you can answer a more general question in that is it okay to add in info about research from systematic review sources like https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7019938/ to Wikipedia articles? Are they solid enough sources? TheUntamedBig (talk) 02:41, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Reliable sources § Academic consensus does say that Review articles, especially those printed in academic review journals that survey the literature, can help clarify academic consensus, and this would include systematic reviews. But I think the reliability of the specific journal and researchers would also be important in determining whether a specific sources is appropriate. I don't have the expertise to say whether the article you linked or the journal Nutrients is reliable – this is something that would be best taken up on the article talk page or one of the WikiProjects listed at the top of the talk page. As for the "Product Blue Book" source, that looks like an industry/commercial website, which may be less reliable. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 03:04, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh thanks for the detailed explanation. Appreciate it and I think that answers my question :).TheUntamedBig (talk) 03:29, 18 November 2021 (UTC) TheUntamedBig The article does have a Research section that touches on putative health benefits. I have not checked the references to see if they meet the WP:MEDRS criteria of being reviews, systematic reviews or meta-analyses. You might also look at the other "G" dietary supplements Ginseng, Garlic and Ginkgo biloba to see how medicinal and traditional uses are described. David notMD (talk) 09:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Can I start my own newsletter?[edit] I was just wondering, is it possible for me to create my own Wikipedia newsletter? (It sounds like a fun project reporting what's going on in Wikipedia, but also difficult. And, I don't know if I even can.) WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 02:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) WaterflameIsAwesome, this is an encyclopedia. Fun is incidental. I suggest that you make a thousand or so substantial improvements to existing article -- improvements in the judgment of other editors, who build on your edits rather than reverting them. Then you can decide whether or not you want to create a newsletter. And if you still do, then after those thousand improvements you'll know what you're writing about. -- Hoary (talk) 02:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Ok, good idea. I just thought it would be something else to make Wikipedia worth my while. Because I'm not gonna sit around Wikipedia just editing articles all day. I just thought it would be a good break from doing my duty, but I'll try and get 1,000,000 edits before I start a newsletter. :/ WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 02:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Nobody expects you to edit articles all day. Your fellow-editors hope that the edits that you do make are improvements. (If one in fifty is mistaken, OK. If a substantial percentage are mistaken, not OK.) To take a break from improving articles, there are many possibilities, many of them away from your computer (or phone). -- Hoary (talk) 02:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I meant like other things on Wikipedia, not including away from WP. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 02:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) WaterflameIsAwesome, I think it's good to approach Wikipedia as a reader, and then, while you're reading, to encounter some kind of deficiency or irritation or other kind of problem -- and then not to rush in but to think about it: "Do I really know what's going on here? Am I sure that what I have in mind is an improvement?" When you are pretty confident that you can answer "yes and yes", improve it, carefully. This may take rather more time than you want to spend on it, but when it's done you'll be more confident of what you're doing. Look for opportunities to make similar improvements elsewhere. Soon you'll be pretty good at this, and fast, too. That will bring a feeling of satisfaction. (Just one thing: Avoid looking for "grammar mistakes". A certain kind of editor cites something written in an underinformed, silly book about grammar -- there are plenty of these, many of them from respected publishers -- and wastes lots of time inflicting some so-called "grammar rule" on perfectly good prose.) -- Hoary (talk) 07:34, 18 November 2021 (UTC) To @Hoary: WP:LIGHTENUP. To @WaterflameIsAwesome: check out Wikipedia:Department of Fun. ––FormalDude talk 02:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Bah, Hoary (talk) 05:15, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Getting to 1,000,000 edits is a reach. According to Wikipedia:List of Wikipedians by number of edits, only 13 people have surpassed that milestone. David notMD (talk) 09:45, 18 November 2021 (UTC) To WaterflameIsAwesome: if you're planning to write your own Wikipedia newsletter, and send it out to a mailing list that you maintain yourself, that's fine, I doubt anyone here can stop you. If you're planning to publish it using Wikipedia itself, you may encounter difficulties. Wikipedia has its own monthly newsletter, The Signpost, which used to have interesting articles about the running of Wikipedia, but has become anodyne since the Wikimedia Foundation starting influencing its contents. If your plan is to compete with The Signpost, I wish you success; but you're going to need some good high-level contacts to supply your information. Maproom (talk) 12:30, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Tips on creating a user page[edit] I need help on what I should add to my user page. I've created it, but I'm not sure what to do with it. Here it is: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:WaterflameIsAwesome WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) oh shoot I forgot my signature provides a link XD WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:23, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @WaterflameIsAwesome: you could add what you first edit was. You could add userboxes based off your interests; something maybe like sports. You can also add userboxes that say how many edits you have made etc. you can also look at my user page for an example and my userboxes that you might want to use. Kaleeb18 (talk) 03:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Citations[edit] Sorry that im asking a question about the same article again. in the section other films section in the Woody (Toy Story article are my uses of the IMDb citations inappropriate, because I saw some WP article that said it is not a reliable source sometimes. Also can I use this as a citation for the whole part where the article talks about how woody appears in the short films? Kaleeb18 (talk) 03:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Kaleeb18: Citing IMDb is generally discouraged because it is user-generated content; Citing IMDb and IMDB-EL have suggestions on when IMDb might be an appropriate source. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:15, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Did You Know[edit] Can anyone here please tell me how I can find yesterday's DID YOU KNOW (17th Nov, 2021). I had seen about someone breastfeeding in the nursing room, in front of some males, and she was also a politician. Actually that is not the case, I want to find yesterday DID YOU KNOW. I cannot find it in the page history?? Cannot understand why. Please assist me in the following matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:02, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Here's the DYK archive for the current month, with links and search for the whole archive. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:10, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionhThanks a lot for helping me again. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:16, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh Yeah it was Susan Catania. I wanted to read about her. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:19, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Just so you know - the reason you couldn't find it in the history of the front page is that the Did You Know section is a template, rather than an article. So you'd have to check the history of the template rather than of the front page itself. DS (talk) 19:28, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I do not understand why a New York Times reference has been flagged as an unreliable source. Help?[edit]  Courtesy link: Martha Nothmann The source is: "A Nazi Legacy Haunts a Museum’s New Galleries", url https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/11/arts/design/kunsthaus-zurich-buhrle-collection.html The message I received was: "Ways to improve Martha Nothmann Hello, Eli185, Thank you for creating Martha Nothmann. I have tagged the page as having some issues to fix, as a part of our page curation process and note that: Many of the references are unreliable, such as the one from The New York Times The tags can be removed by you or another editor once the issues they mention are addressed. If you have questions, leave a comment here and begin it with @Qwerfjkl:. Remember to sign your reply with Eli185 (talk) 07:37, 18 November 2021 (UTC). For broader editing help, please visit the Teahouse. Delivered via the Page Curation tool, on behalf of the reviewer. Qwerfjkltalk 07:23, 18 November 2021 (UTC)" What am I supposed to do if a reviewer does not like the content of a NYT article about Nazi art looting in a Wikipedia article about a Jewish art collector? Eli185 (talk) 07:37, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Eli185, Qwerfjkl actually specified the NYT in their comment in your talk page. You responded by politely asking what was wrong with it. That was a good response. Now wait for the answer. (If no answer comes in a couple of days, then you'd be welcome to bring up the matter elsewhere.) -- Hoary (talk) 08:51, 18 November 2021 (UTC) How is everyones day[edit]  Dsmi3939 (talk) 08:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism on page Kanchi Kamakoti Peetham by anonymous user ip[edit] An anonymous user 117.223.250.19 has deleted entire intro and writes propaganda. Pls help. Where should I report?Kannadiga kanmani Kannadiga kanmani (talk) 09:48, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I see only one edit (a large deletion) by that IP address, which you reverted. I suggest you put the article on your Watch list, but do not bother to warn or ask for a block on the IP unless this is repeated. David notMD (talk) 09:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) How to move articles from sandbox to the main space[edit] kindly help me to move an article from my sandbox to the main space. User:Ngangaesther/sandbox Ngangaesther (talk) 10:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Please, see Wikipedia:So_you_made_a_userspace_draft#Ready!. Ruslik_Zero 12:52, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Editing the content of a page[edit] Good day, As the communication team of Societe Generale de Banque au Liban, we have noticed some wrong information in the presentation of our bank on Wikipedia. Can you kindly help us through the best procedure to amend the content without violating the page? i.e. an "allegation section" contains erupted information that we are seeking to remove. As for the introduction, we would like to bring some modifications reflecting the current description of our bank. Awaiting your kind feedback in order to bring the required amendments as soon as possible. Best regards, Christelle Feghaly Head of Press & Media Relations Cfeghaly (talk) 11:21, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Cfeghaly. Before you or anyone of your fellow team members try to edit the article about your bank, I strongly suggest you and they take the time to carefully read through Wikipedia:Conflict of interest, Wikipedia:Paid-contribution disclosure and Wikipedia:Plain and simple conflict of interest guide because they most certainly would apply to you or anyone else connected to the bank based upon what you posted above. Then, you probably should also take a close look at Wikipedia:Ownership of content because it's important for you and your fellow team members to understand that your bank doesn't not have any type of editorial control over what's written about it on Wikipedia. This doesn't mean that anyone can simple write whatever they want (good or bad) about the bank on Wikipedia, but it does mean that all content about the bank is going to be assessed in accordance with relevant Wikipedia policies and guidelines and may be considered acceptable even if it's not something the bank likes. -- Marchjuly (talk) 12:29, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Strong warnings have been placed on your Talk page about declaring paid situation and ceasing to edit the article directly. Same applies to User:Elite Moussa. David notMD (talk) 12:47, 18 November 2021 (UTC) That said, I did look at the article and to be frank, all I see is mention of an uncited allegation made by an unspecified "local newspaper", with two reasonable-looking sources denying that the allegation was incorrect. It makes me feel that the entire two sentence allegation section is quite possibly not appropriate in the article, and was done for POV purposes, and that it should be removed until better sources are found. The Press & Media Relations Team in the form of @Cfeghaly is advised to make an WP:EDITREQUEST on the talk page, detailed explicitly what changes they would seek other editors make for them. They can then investigate what, if any Reliable Sources have been published and make the changes accordingly. Declaring their Conflict of Interest in that edit and also on their Userpage would be important things to do, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 14:05, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Declined Article due to notability[edit] How do I make my subject notable, if i have added reliable sources? Jasminbrown1202 (talk) 14:40, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Jasminbrown1202 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. I assume this refers to Draft:Tonesa "FirstladyofBMF" Welch. You cannot make the subject notable, but you can demonstrate their notability with independent reliable sources with significant coverage of the person. Much of the draft is unsourced(see WP:REFB for assistance with citations). 331dot (talk) 14:46, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Also see Wikipedia:No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. Notability is something that the subject has, not the article. You need to demonstrate that the subject is themselves notable by citing sufficiently in-depth, independent, reliable sources where you got the information for writing the article from. See also WP:42 for a concise explanation. --Jayron32 15:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) So is the problem I need to add more sources inside of the article? The subject is notable. She was the head of the biggest drug trafficking and money laundering organization in the country. Everyone knows who BMF is. Big Meech and Southwest T. She is the longtime girlfriend of Southwest T and was on the indictment. She has had tv shows casted behind her role as well as a Documentary done on her through BET. I am not sure what else I should add. Perhaps those clips inside the article? — Preceding unsigned comment added by Jasminbrown1202 (talk • contribs) 15:23, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Jasminbrown1202, and welcome to the Teahouse. The points you mention in your last paragraph are all relevant to notability in the world, but not one of them is directly relevant to Wikipedia's criteria for notability, which are mostly to do with "is there enough independent material reliably published about this person to base an encyclopaedia article on?" Remember that Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. --ColinFine (talk) 16:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Cleaned up, and added Wikilink to Black Mafia Family. See Help:Referencing for beginners on how to convert URL refs to properly formatted refs. A suggestion: work on refs in your Sandbox, then move to article only when those are in good shape. Up to you to demonstrate that existing or additional refs are about Tonesa Welch. David notMD (talk) 17:31, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people on that Wikipedia page need to be guided through it?[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 15:35, 18 November 2021 (UTC) The relevant page is List of people from Merseyside. As you can see, ACtiling has made many edits to the page, with good intentions, but many have had to be reverted as they also removed people without any reason, and were misplaced. Any guidance from editors here that can be offered to this enthusiastic editor will, I'm sure, help. Ghmyrtle (talk) 15:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) ACtiling Please read the policy at WP:LISTPEOPLE.--Shantavira|feed me 16:09, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Long quotation in a talk page[edit] Hello. The Talk:Etel Adnan page contains a lengthy quote from Among Good Christian Peoples: Teaching Etel Adnan's "Sitt Marie Rose" by John G. Champagne published in College Literature Vol. 27, No. 3 (Fall, 2000), pp. 47-70 (24 pages) Published By: The Johns Hopkins University Press. Even if it isn't copyvio there is a template: {{Over-quotation}} stating that lengthy quotations are not encyclopedic, however that template expands into "This article" not "This talk page". The documentation that I've found regarding this doesn't discuss talk pages so I don't know if a lengthy quotation in a talk page is an issue. The owner of the account who wrote the quotation doesn't seem interested in doing anything about the quotation. The quotation is out-of-context and not cited; it does not appear to be transformative. Is the quotation copyvio? Thanks Jamplevia (talk) 15:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Edição[edit] Como editar um artigo? Artajeiro (talk) 15:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Google's Translation: Header: Edition Text: How to edit an article? ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 16:01, 18 November 2021 (UTC) This is the English language Wikipedia. Perhaps you are looking for the Portuguese Wikipedia? --David Biddulph (talk) 16:03, 18 November 2021 (UTC) List of countries[edit] List of countries with their first National Hockey League player - Chris Chelios was born in GREECE (please add this to the list) Cheers, Pat Reid  2001:1970:4CDD:200:2934:2AEC:4C57:DE2 (talk) 16:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please direct your comment to Talk:List of countries with their first National Hockey League player. There, the editors that follow that article will see it. 331dot (talk) 16:49, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Not according to Chris Chelios. --David Biddulph (talk) 16:50, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Edit to Atom (software)[edit] Can someone approve of my edit to atom (software) MCBOiS1210 (talk) 17:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) As far as I can see, MCBOiS1210, you have neither edited Atom (software) nor put a request on Talk:Atom (software). What are you trying to do? --ColinFine (talk) 17:10, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Evidently, I mean Talk:Atom (text editor). --ColinFine (talk) 17:13, 18 November 2021 (UTC) David Leigh Clark[edit] I have been asked to add info for my present Wikipedia reference (David Leigh Clark). I have used online instructions since computes became common but I cannot understand how to add a biography to my name. I registered for an account but need some help. I don't know what a TILDES is?  Pleh15 (talk) 18:07, 18 November 2021 (UTC) For information on not writing an autobiography, see WP:autobiography. To find out about a tilde, see tilde. --David Biddulph (talk) 18:16, 18 November 2021 (UTC)  Courtesy link: David Leigh Clark Wikignome Wintergreentalk 18:17, 18 November 2021 (UTC) "Tildes" is the plural of "Tilde". One tilde: ~ Two tildes: ~~ End a post to a talk page with four tildes, and the system will expand that into your signature plus a timestamp. DS (talk) 19:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Dr. Vin Gupta[edit] Help with AfC for Dr. Vin Gupta Hello! I've had two experienced editors provide excellent feedback for an AfC for Vin Gupta, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Vin_Gupta They've both independently said they had hoped for one last editor to weigh in to ensure an "unbiased outcome" and since its been a few weeks, I was hopeful you might be willing to assist. Thank you again. Caroline grossman23 (talk) 18:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) It says: "Review waiting, please be patient. This may take 2 months or more, since drafts are reviewed in no specific order. There are 2,397 pending submissions waiting for review." Remember that there is no deadline. --David Biddulph (talk) 18:27, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Permission for a photo[edit] I want to add a photo to the article on my father, mathematician, Beresford Parlett. The original photographer of the photo is now deceased. Just to make sure, I contacted his widow and asked permission to use the photo for the Wikipedia site. She said "yes" to me verbally. However, when I tried to post the photo to the site it was later taken down. How do I get official permission to post this photo? SlamDunk2000 (talk) 18:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @SlamDunk2000:: Instructions are available at Wikipedia:Requesting copyright permission; there's a optional form letter for the copyright holder to complete and an email address to send the permission to where someone will verify the proper release of copyright. If you have more specific questions on how to navigate that page, please let us know. --Jayron32 18:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Need help to re-edit page to remove a content problem panel.[edit] Hi there. A panel has just appeared on my wiki page saying that some of the wording on my page is self-promoting for want of a better word. Could anyone help me go through my page and edit it so I can meet the guidelines and get this panel down? thanks! Page link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johanna_Spinks 107.185.204.212 (talk) 19:10, 18 November 2021 (UTC) It seems Njd-de is already working on cleaning up the page (thank you, Njd-de!). If you have further concerns or questions, there's always the article's talk page: Talk:Johanna Spinks. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 20:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Sumner bio[edit] It's okay with me if you delete the biography I wrote of myself. I am not a "notable" person and don't meet your guidelines. Indiana Author (talk) 19:41, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Edit reversion[edit] FYI?– Separated from above section. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 19:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) So this user reverted my edit to Sir Keir's talk-page and I saw red and added in the link I posted on the talk page on the mainspace (along with an edit summary basically slandering him) which I'd added in the hopes of generating some kind of discussion. Obviously I feel a little foolish about this and wish I hadn't done it. What can I do to make amends? Phil of rel (talk) 19:46, 18 November 2021 (UTC) "spamming"[edit] You asked me to "stop spamming my book." I will comply. However, I defend all the changes I made as factually accurate and documented in the University of Chicago Archives, where I did most of the research for my book on Amos Alonzo Stagg. David E. Sumner, PhD Indiana Author (talk) 19:47, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Even if there was nothing wrong with the additions, hopefully you can understand the conflict of interest, and that Wikipedia edits should be made by people independent of the subject. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 19:57, 18 November 2021 (UTC) For context, I am the user who called his edits spam. user:Indiana Author wrote the autobiographical article David E. Sumner without disclosing his conflict of interest, and then mentioned his recent book in something like 30 different articles at his "publisher's suggestion" [3]. Meters (talk) 20:06, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1055961730" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Wikipedia discussion Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 18 November 2021, at 21:43 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH Hoary, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 hi 2 Capital punishment in the Bible 3 How to give warnings with Twinkle tags 4 The Future of Wikipedia 5 Wikitampering: One chart, 52 weeks 6 Draft:Shyam Sunder Jyani 7 How to create click to drop down segments of an article? 8 What to do about unsourced, promotional, biographical articles? 9 Notability References 10 Ginger? 11 Can I start my own newsletter? 12 Tips on creating a user page 13 Wiki Did You Know 14 I do not understand why a New York Times reference has been flagged as an unreliable source. Help? 15 How is everyones day 16 Vandalism on page Kanchi Kamakoti Peetham by anonymous user ip 17 How to move articles from sandbox to the main space 18 Editing the content of a page 19 Declined Article due to notability 20 I would like to add people on Merseyside people on that Wikipedia page need to be guided through it? 21 Edição 22 List of countries 23 Edit to Atom (software) 24 David Leigh Clark 25 Dr. Vin Gupta 26 Permission for a photo 27 Need help to re-edit page to remove a content problem panel. 28 Sumner bio 29 Edit reversion 30 "spamming" 31 How many edits? 32 Citation help needed 33 Revision history 34 Visual editor creates bugs in refs 35 Is this allowed or not 36 User Rights 37 Someone deleted my comments on a talk page 38 Contributions to Signature 39 If a user requests that something is added on a talk page and I (or someone else) has done it, can the request be deleted? Is not, what should be done? 40 Repeated requests for logins 41 Adding well-referenced negative facts 42 Copyright issue 43 Why is my Talk Page post in italics? 44 Can someone tell me how my draft is looking please? 45 Clarification on dispute resolution 45.1 More on dispute question 46 New page 47 Adminstats 48 What to do if wording does not reflect cited source? 49 Would you like to review my draft on "Autism in China"? 50 Stub pages 51 7M Pages 52 Archived URLs 53 Watchlists of other editors 54 PLEASE ACCEPT MY ARTICLE CREATION I WANT TO MAKE ARTICLE WHO POLITICIAN AND CELEBRATIS PERSON 55 How do I know if a page is full? 56 Which tag to use for page protect? 57 DS Alert regarding Arab–Israeli conflict 58 Logo Update Not Appearing in Article 59 Hey, I need help... 60 How to cite this 61 Need Help 62 I keep getting "you need consensus" but when i reply i get no response back. 63 Reliable sources 64 SUGGESTION(actually): A small idea for improved understanding.... 64.1 ======= 64.2 ===== 65 Rootsweb.org/shelby does NOT exist - replaced with https://algenweb.org/shelby 66 Autoconfirmed user 67 Template:Uw-create-kept 68 Template:Uw-redirect-kept 69 Rows and Columns Most recent archives 1112, 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131 hi[edit] hi,Anyone? Athena-en (talk) 07:16, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Athena-en: Please don't remove the COI template from Xian Jun Loh without a discussion. And please see WP:COI. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 07:21, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Timtempleton:?received.07:52, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Capital punishment in the Bible[edit] i am a professor of Hebrew Bible/ Old Testament at Duke. how can i go about editing this page, correcting many of the deficiencies noted? marc brettler — Preceding unsigned comment added by 152.3.43.54 (talk) 16:02, 16 November 2021 (UTC) You may make an edit request(click for instructions) detailing changes you feel are needed, on the article talk page, Talk:Capital punishment in the Bible. 331dot (talk) 16:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Alternatively, you could create an account (there is no need to use your real name) and when it is autoconfirmed you'll be able to edit the article directly. It is protected from direct access by IP-only accounts because it suffers from so much vandalism. Whether you edit directly or via an edit request, please be sure to supply reliable sources for any change. However expert you are, we do not allow original research in Wikipedia. Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:14, 16 November 2021 (UTC) As an fyi, here's what "autoconfirmed" means if that didn't mean much to you: Autoconfirmed users. -- asilvering (talk) 03:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) The artice is currently under protection (WP:SEMI) but that expires in a couple of days. WP:TUTORIAL and WP:EXPERT can be of help to you. Also: PLEASE improve that article. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 16:53, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Click on Talk (upper left) to see if some of what you have in mind has been subject of past or current debate. David notMD (talk) 17:06, 16 November 2021 (UTC) How to give warnings with Twinkle tags[edit] I asked this question to the editor, who gave me welcome message, but he is not answering it. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_talk:HiLo48#Tag_Twinkle --ZebraaaLounge (talk) 18:13, 16 November 2021 (UTC) ZebraaaLounge (talk) 18:13, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @ZebraaaLounge: Those are given with the tool called Twinkle, however I recommend you don't use it until you've gained a bit more experience and you resolve the edit war you are currently engaged in. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 18:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @ZebraaaLounge: it is absolutely unacceptable for you to falsify another user's signature, as you did in this edit. I don't know what you were trying to do, but please do not ever do that again. CodeTalker (talk) 19:38, 16 November 2021 (UTC) CodeTalker, Where did I falsify their signature. Wikipedia was having lots of page loading, problem, and server error. I wrote their names instead of pinging them. I was replying to one user mentioning another user's name. And in the whole edit, only my signature has links to my user page, talkpage. They are obviously watching their last edits, and that's why I did not ping them at that time.ZebraaaLounge (talk) 02:17, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I checked again and saw I ended the comment with my signature only. And page history will show who made what edit. ZebraaaLounge (talk) 02:31, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @ZebraaaLounge: I think you messed up with that edit. If you look what happened in the diff, not only did you add a comment of your own, correctly signed, but you also changed someone else's signature from a comment 4 paragraphs higher so that it read [[User:NarSakSasLee|Echo1Charlie]] instead of [[User:NarSakSasLee|NarSakSasLee]]. This would have presented the text Echo1Charlie (while linking to NarSakSasLee, who actually wrote the paragraph so signed). You can see how this would create a very bad impression, as it looks as though you are trying to put NarSakSasLee's words in Echo1Charlie's mouth. Best avoided! Elemimele (talk) 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Elemimele: @CodeTalker: I understand what happened now. Their names NarSakSasLee are uncommon words, jumbled letters, so not easy to spell. I was copy-pasting their names to write my own comment. Instead I copy-pasted another's name in other's signature. Their signature has spelling. Bbb23 name is easy to remember. ZebraaaLounge (talk) 07:06, 18 November 2021 (UTC) The Future of Wikipedia[edit] Firstly, thank you for the invitation. Due to Wikipedia relying solely on Donations - would it be a possibility that Wikipedia would ever close? I have donated and will donate to WikiMedia, but I think a fundraising option would be great, to advertise Wikipedia's need for donations internationally in person, in the streets. Just a couple of thoughts, Best Regards, StrawberryFieldsChorley StrawberryFieldsChorley (talk) 23:57, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for your donations. Wikipedia needs donations, but I haven't heard that it's particularly pressed for money. So if you have more and are feeling magnanimous, consider one of the various alternatives. (Médecins Sans Frontières seems good.) -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @StrawberryFieldsChorley As Hoary says, 'thank you'. The Wikimedia Foundation actually raises a lot more money than is required simply to meet technical support and server costs, not to mention the 12GW/h of electricity needed to meet the demands of being one of the top most-visited websites in the world. Very large amounts of money are spent in educational and outreach work, especially in the less developed parts of the world where education and access to information is so needed. So, to answer your question as to whether any of the multiple language versions of Wikipedia would ever close, on a purely funding basis, I think the answer is "no". Though, were it ever to spend, year on year, more than it brings in annually, then it could find itself having to 'draw its horns in'. The people who have actually written the content in the 6.2million+ articles on English Wikipedia are all volunteers - just as they are in the myriad of other language projects. So rest assured that your donations never end up in the pockets of us editors. We do it all for the enjoyment and the satisfaction. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:34, 17 November 2021 (UTC) All that said, though, of course Wikipedia will end one day, as will everything humans have created. "Ever" is a very long time. DS (talk) 02:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Can't disagree with that one iota! Nick Moyes (talk) 21:40, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes is right. Given the fact that Wikipedia is the 13th most visited site in the world, and the largest encyclopedia in the history of the world by more than nearly triple the amount that the second largest has, the likelihood of Wikipedia or any other language variants closing is not very great. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 14:43, 17 November 2021 (UTC) "Too big to fail" is not a waterproof argument. Megaupload had fifty million daily users when it was shut down (and Wikipedia is more illegal in some countries than Megaupload was in the US). TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 09:40, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi @StrawberryFieldsChorley: - Wikipedia (specifically, the Wikimedia Foundation) publishes their financial details here. The gist of it is that: They currently get more from donations and grants than they spend, They have around $170 million in cash in their bank account(s), They spend around $2.5 million a year to keep the website running - the rest is for employees, projects, outreach, scholarships, etc. So in case donations suddenly stop entirely, I’m fairly sure they’d be able to cut off a lot of expenses and be able to make do - maybe for 10 years. Of course, 95% of internet users and big tech companies would prefer to not have Wikipedia suddenly disappear, so I’m sure something will get figured out. Juxlos (talk) 10:21, 19 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add that maybe non-English Wikipedia sites may close at some point earlier than the English Wikipedia, due to those sites not being as popular as the English Wikipedia, and having less pages, and albeit less contributors, but let's not focus on that, XD. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:38, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Wikitampering: One chart, 52 weeks[edit] There may be other Wikipedia pages with this peculiar little bit of tampering but this is the first one I've found. Every one of the links at the bottom of the page listing the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play number ones of 2005 – https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Billboard_Hot_Dance_Club_Play_number_ones_of_2005 – goes to the Billboard chart for March 28, 2020. I'm afraid to look at the pages for 2004 and 2006! Thomps2020 (talk) 01:53, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: It looks like what used to be unique URLs for those dates are now just redirecting to Billboard's chart for March 2020. I think this is something that changed on Billboard's website, not on-wiki vandalism. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 01:59, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020 I'll echo what Claudine said - Doesn't look like any malicious intent, and the page history doesn't show any vandalism :). I'm updating that article's references right now with archive links, so hopefully nobody else will get confused! Either way, good eye catching that. ThadeusOfNazerethTalk to Me! 02:41, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you, Thadeus, for going to all that trouble. If someone from Billboard really did redirect all the links, why use a chart from March of 2020? Why not have the links go to the current week's chart? Not being in the "link redirecting" business, I have no idea. Thomps2020 (talk) 05:10, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Well, I just checked the links on the page of Hot Dance Club Play number-one singles of 1992.....and 1993.....and 1994.....and 1995 – and every link goes to that same chart of March 28, 2020. Yeah, Diana Ross' "Love Hangover 2020" was number one. We know! We know! Who redirected the links – and why? Is there any way to find out? Thomps2020 (talk) 05:37, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: You would probably have to ask Billboard. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:49, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: Chipping in here, it's because as it stands that chart from March 2020 is the most recent one (the Dance Club Play chart has been suspended since that date due to COVID). So they probably changed all the links and the no-longer-working link format redirects to the latest chart, which in this case is 18 months old. Hope that makes sense..... -- ChrisTheDude (talk) 12:31, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: Organizations and companies often rework their websites for a variety of reasons, and older content gets overwritten by more recent stuff or moved to some new url address as part of that process; so, when you click on the old link, you end up getting redirected to some other page. Sometimes you can find archived versions of the old webpages via sites like the Wayback Machine and this is what ThadeusOfNazereth has gone and done; so, everything should be fine now. You can do the same as well the next time you come across a similar problem if you want, or you can use templates {{Citations broken}} or {{Dead link}} to let others know about the problem. -- Marchjuly (talk) 06:45, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Shyam Sunder Jyani[edit] FYI?– Removed leading spaces – ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) Hello there, I am new with Wikipedia community. When I made first edit on a Wikipedia article, I was on cloud nine. After that, I made few other minor changes. I submitted an article to publish. The page url is https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Shyam_Sunder_Jyani . Unfortunately, it has not been accepted and declined. The person whom I wrote article has a significant coverage on print media, online media and with few Govt. official websites. Could you guide me how should I provide accurate and reliable information so that if it get approved if it meets with wikipedia guidelines? I also want to learn best practices of wikipedia. Best, Jakhar Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:52, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: The links in the decline message tell you what you need to do to show that the subject of this article is notable – provide reliable, independent, secondary sources, and cite them using Wikipedia's referencing methods. Verifiability tells you why it's important to add sources to articles and how you can identify reliable sources. Your first source, a faculty profile from the professor's college, would probably be considered a self-published source, and besides, it doesn't say why he is notable. I am not certain whether India Today would be considered reliable (see discussion at § India Today or IndiaToday.com) but even if it is, you would need more than one good source. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) FYI?– Fixed indentation per WP:THREAD – ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) Thank you ClaudineChionh so much for your prompt response and teaching me about reliable sources. Yes, there are few reliable sources are available. Below are the few sources where about him and his initiative is covered in this year. Could you help me out if these are the reliable source? https://www.unccd.int/actionsland-life-programme/land-life-award-2021-healthy-land-healthy-livesBe https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/rajasthan-women-vow-to-nurture-green-family/article34862254.ece https://www.dw.com/en/familial-forestry-in-india-caring-for-trees-like-theyre-family/a-59215321 https://www.unccd.int/news-events/2021-land-life-award-winner-familial-forestry https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CgYwtwGedxg Thank you and I patiently waiting for your further guidance. Jakhar Singh — Preceding unsigned comment added by Jakhar Singh (talk • contribs) 09:35, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Please keep replies threaded by indenting your reply with a colon at the start, and sign your reply adding four tildes (~~~~) at the end. You can enable the Discussion Tools beta feature to indent and sign your replies automatically on talk pages – look for this in Preferences. As to your sources: WP:RSP is a good place to start looking for discussions and consensus on the reliability of many sources. The Hindu: generally yes Deutsche Welle (DW): It's not in the table but archived discussions suggest yes United Nations agencies: It depends on the topic and the agency (see discussion at § Is the United Nations a Reliable Source?) – specific sources should be discussed on the article/draft talk page. YouTube: usually no — Preceding unsigned comment added by ClaudineChionh (talk • contribs) 10:12, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you ClaudineChionh for teaching me. I will look for the sources you suggested. For a new article, Would it be good if just brief about the object in few lines (e.g. 3-5 lines) so it can be approved easily and then subsequent edits can be made? The article which I am writing, he is a Govt. college Professor and apart from his teaching job, he works for environment and society so could I use the phrases like environmentalist and social worker? Could you teach me what needs to keep in mind while writing a first article for best practices? Best Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:38, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Every fact or descriptive phrase you use must be supported by reliable sources. You can read about the steps to create an article, though as I am not an article reviewer, I am not the best person to ask for advice on this process. You are strongly advised to read your first article as well, and it's also a very good idea to spend some time on other tasks here before creating a new article, which is one of the more difficult tasks in Wikipedia. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Everyone has a slightly different style of articles and word choices - and in this case, one set of phrases you can use is "Shyam Sunder Jyani is an Indian environmentalist and academician". Looking at a glance from google news, I would say Mr. Jyani here does pass Wikipedia's notability guidelines - I hope you don't mind if I stir the article draft up a bit. Juxlos (talk) 10:31, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Minor point: an academician is a member of an academy; it can be used about an academic in general, but academic is a much more common term for a person who works as a professor, lecturer, or researcher at a university. --bonadea contributions talk 10:50, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Fair enough. Regardless, article has been extended with sources ranging from 2009 to 2021 - fairly sure it's good to go, if a bit stubby. Regardless I'm not familiar with the reviewer side of AfC so I'd let other editors do it. Juxlos (talk) 11:01, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Juxlos, Thank you so much for drafting the article of Shyam Sunder Jyani. As I am new with wikipedia hence in the learning phase so I started this Teahouse help talk with ClaudineChionh then you came in and did a great job. The voluntary continuation of wikipedians to humanity is really commendable. I really admire your voluntary services. Bless you. I will keep enhance my learning and give my best to this wikipedia community. P.S. Juxlos, there are minor phrases or grammer tweaks that need to be corrected in the article. I think I am now able to do this... Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:28, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How to create click to drop down segments of an article?[edit] I would like to know how to create one of those click-to-drop-down aspects of an article? I would like to make this page (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sharksploitation) more accessible. People can choose to view the films by release order or alphabetical order or alphabetical for the first film with it's sequels below it. As it is now I need to use Ctrl-f to find what I am looking for Simdude1990 (talk) 16:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Do you mean a sortable table? Help:Table has a lot of information about how to create and format tables. Or do you mean "collapsed" content, where you can hide or show part of the content on a page? That's usually not recommended for articles – there is some information about it here. --bonadea contributions talk 16:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990: – I didn't manage to ping you the first time... --bonadea contributions talk 16:32, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I mean the collapsed segments. I am thinking something like the following Films in Alphabetical order (collapsed) Films in Alphabetical and Sequel order (collapsed) Films by Genre/type (collapsed) Films in release order (standard article, non-collapsible) - Although I will probably invert the list and separate it by year (or group of years eg 1980-1985, 2000's etc.)--Simdude1990 (talk) 16:44, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990: Welcome to the Teahouse. Like Bonadea said, collapsible content generally shouldn't be collapsed per the Manual of Style. Perhaps sortable tables would work better for you? —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 19:55, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990 Firstly, there genuinely isn't enough content in that page to warrant any collapsing/hiding; I can't imagine why on earth you'd think there is? I do, however, agree with @Tenryuu, and feel that a sortable table would allow users to sort these films by year or by title, or by anything else you felt inclined to add. But that would only merit being collapsible were there some other content worthy of bringing to the fore, but I don't see any on this topic. (An example of a very lengthy article that I created which can have its one table hidden to make the whole page more viewable can be found here). Secondly, I really fail to understand why this page exists under that title. Surely it would be better as a List article (e.g. List of sharksploitation films). Nick Moyes (talk) 01:01, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for your input, a sortable table seems like the way to go, I didn't know they existed. I intend on including a lot of other films that are missing from the list, when they are included I'm sure it will be quite large. I may change it to a list page, however, myself or others may add other information that would make it no longer just a list. Some of the films to add don't have Wikipedia pages, they all have IMDB pages or foreign wikis see here for an example. Is it ok to link to those from the movie title? or would it be better to have this (IMDB) next to the corresponding film? or no link except for in the references?--Simdude1990 (talk) 10:55, 18 November 2021 (UTC) List articles on Wikipedia should contain items that still abide by Wikipedia's content policies, particularly verifiablilty and notability. Generally that means that each film should have its own English Wikipedia article (I specify English because other languages tend to have less strict content policies and guidelines); IMDb and foreign wikis aren't acceptable as they are for the most part user-generated, which trashes verifiability. Lists aren't expected to be exhaustive. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 17:07, 18 November 2021 (UTC) "IMDb and foreign wikis aren't acceptable as they are for the most part user-generated" Literally so is this English version of Wikipedia..... I can always build the appropriate pages later and link them in properly, just in the interim, a link so someone can look into the film beyond the list. I will only add films that I have seen, at least then I won't add anything that does not exist--Simdude1990 (talk) 10:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Literally so is this English version of Wikipedia. That is correct, which is why editors are not allowed to cite Wikipedia itself. There's no deadline to have any article "finished", so I'd focus on establishing films' notability with high-quality reliable sources and creating articles for those before adding them onto the list. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 16:30, 19 November 2021 (UTC) What to do about unsourced, promotional, biographical articles?[edit] Hi, I recently came across the article Fayez Barakat while browsing recent changes. The article has mostly been edited by users that only write about Fayez Barakat, has no citations, and the two references with ISBNs seem to be published by a company that has only published books on Fayez Barakat. It contains plenty of unsourced direct quotes, and passages such as: "He is best known as one of the world's most important collectors and dealers of ancient art"; "At the age of 14 Barakat was offered a Fulbright Scholarship to study medicine in the United States on account of his remarkable aptitude for absorbing and understanding information" [seems extremely unlikely]; "Barakat remarks that 'our mind cannot penetrate the mystery of the Universe. We know that the number of galaxies is endless, and we try to listen with the ears of our soul the music they make moving across the infinite skies'. He looks at the universe and at the multitude of galaxies and constellations with a subliminal and telepathic telescope, seeing those eternal lights moving across the infinite through the intuitive eye of his heart. He tries to evade the boundaries of this galaxy through the intuitive dimension, breaking through the limits of space and time, and see the entirety of the infinite and of the eternal. In doing so, he fuses himself into the quantum field, into the energy moving the universe on a sub-atomic and global level. The energy the artist impresses on the canvas is the one that permeates his soul, intellect, senses and instincts, and merges into the energy which animates and moves the universe."; and so on. What do I do about this? It seems to me that the entire article should be deleted for a complete lack of sources or anything establishing notability. But how do I proceed to do this? Do I just start a proposal for deletion? Should I post on the Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons/Noticeboard to get someone more experienced to look it over, or is there something else that would be the best course of action? Thanks in advance for any help! Knuthove (talk) 20:19, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Knuthove (talk) I looked at Fayez Barakat and see it is now tagged as having multiple issues. In addition, the talk page has a new Conflict of Interest tag. Thank you for bringing this to the attention of other editors. Karenthewriter (talk) 22:39, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Knuthove, Never be afraid to remove unverified info, especially puffery of this kind. - hako9 (talk) 22:44, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Knuthove Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. I see that a number of editors have now tagged the article with their concerns, and I have personally removed swathes of uncited trivia and promotional text, and warned the IP editor about declaring a conflict of interest Assuming you are motivated to take action yourself, you could look for online sources yourself to decide whether or not this person meets our Notability Criteria for living people. The page called WP:BEFORE outlines the steps one should take prior to putting an article forward for deletion. I note there are various sources listed, though the one I did search out (see here) is clearly a self-published gallery catalogue. Maybe others are too, though some of the claims in the article (if true) do suggest he might well be notable. So some further investigation would be helpful, and then perhaps a post at WP:BLP/N could be merited if its still not clear. I hope this helps, and thanks for raising your question here. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:47, 17 November 2021 (UTC) It has now been stripped down to a mere stub, citing three sources. This may look promising, until one realizes that all three are only interviews. (I'm surprised that WP:RS doesn't mention interviews; all that I can find in a hurry is Wikipedia:Interviews, which is merely a somewhat waffly essay.) -- Hoary (talk) 23:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I looked for Fayez Barakat on Google and found his Wikipedia article and numerous Fayez Barakat generated cites. Then I went to newspapers.com and found one article (https://www.newspapers.com/image/148931789/?terms=%22Fayez%20Barakat%22&match=1) about the art dealer allegedly buying stolen items. He does not seem to have much media coverage. Karenthewriter (talk) 01:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you all for your comments and editing! I see that the article now is just about what I would have made it if I had removed the unsourced parts myself rather than ask about it here. The reason I didn't do that was because I thought the article might simply be deleted instead. Reading your comments, it seems to me that the question is whether the interviews now listed as sources are enough to establish notability, and if any other sources can be found. I am skeptical that these interviews are independent enough, and seeing how hard finding other sources appears to be, it doesn't look good. I'll go through the steps in WP:BEFORE and see about starting my first AfD discussion eventually. Knuthove (talk) 14:14, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Interviews themselves are never considered independent, although some published interviews can contain a blurb or other critical commentary that is itself independent. This looks like a decent source. Possibly the Barakat gallery might be more notable than its owner. If the article is kept, there are probably sources to be found about the "looted art" angle (for instance, see here is a blog post about a procedure that Iran won against the gallery, blog post but by a law professor so probably usable for the claim that a trial was held) - my layman understanding after a cursory search is that the gallery makes a decent try to avoid buying art registered as stolen, but will still buy stuff "found" by amateurs which surely encourages dubious collection methods. TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 09:58, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Notability References[edit] Where and how do I enter notability references in my new Wikipedia article? CorpTool (talk) 22:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) CorpTool (talk) 22:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @CorpTool Welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for declaring your COI with regard this article. You need to find in-depth sources that are independent of the subject and which are not part of the insider news community (ecosystem) that this company works in. Use only the factual statements in those sources as the basis of the article. Right now, it's seems pretty obvious you are probably being paid to promote this article on Wikipedia because the marketing speak oozes out of every single sentence. See WP:PAID to explicitly declare who is paying you. To be frank, it's wholly unacceptable as an encyclopaedia article right now. So, cut out 9/10ths of the article's current content and present facts that establish Notability based purely upon just those key sources. Read WP:NCORP to learn more. If you feel you've already included the best sources, just link to the top three in any reply you make here and we'll take a quick look at them. I for one am not prepared to wade through dozens of probable press releases and trade magazine links to attempt to ascertain notability. I hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 23:05, 17 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Hello, CorpTool. I'm afraid that your question is like "Where and how do I build foundations for the house I have just put up?" If you write a single statement without having a reliable source wholly independent of the subject for the information in that statement, you are probably wasting your time (and other people's). In respect of Draft:Confiant Inc. I would say on a quick scan that at least three quarters of the draft should be removed, as it is pure marketing copy. Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. When you have found these independent sources, you then need to forget basically everything you know about Confiant, and write exclusively from what those independent sources say (and don't forget to include any substantial criticisms they have). An even better use of your time would be to put this project aside for at least six months while you "learn the trade" of editing Wikipedia by working on improving some of our six million articles unrelated to your COI. --ColinFine (talk) 23:07, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Also, Wikipedia:No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability is a good essay on some of the related problems here. --Jayron32 13:37, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the input. CorpTool (talk) 16:53, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Ginger?[edit] Hi, on the current Ginger wiki page, it really doesn't have any clear distinct info on the actual variety of ginger out there [1] or the positive effects reported by systematic reviews. Is that meant to be normal and is it acceptable to add them in including systematic reviews that explains the positive found effects? From sources like https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7019938/? TheUntamedBig (talk) 02:04, 18 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.producebluebook.com/know-your-commodity/ginger-root/ @TheUntamedBig: Welcome to the Teahouse! The best place for this question is the talk page of the relevant article, which in this case is Talk:Ginger. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 02:30, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the tip. But I was also hoping you can answer a more general question in that is it okay to add in info about research from systematic review sources like https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7019938/ to Wikipedia articles? Are they solid enough sources? TheUntamedBig (talk) 02:41, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Reliable sources § Academic consensus does say that Review articles, especially those printed in academic review journals that survey the literature, can help clarify academic consensus, and this would include systematic reviews. But I think the reliability of the specific journal and researchers would also be important in determining whether a specific sources is appropriate. I don't have the expertise to say whether the article you linked or the journal Nutrients is reliable – this is something that would be best taken up on the article talk page or one of the WikiProjects listed at the top of the talk page. As for the "Product Blue Book" source, that looks like an industry/commercial website, which may be less reliable. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 03:04, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh thanks for the detailed explanation. Appreciate it and I think that answers my question :).TheUntamedBig (talk) 03:29, 18 November 2021 (UTC) TheUntamedBig The article does have a Research section that touches on putative health benefits. I have not checked the references to see if they meet the WP:MEDRS criteria of being reviews, systematic reviews or meta-analyses. You might also look at the other "G" dietary supplements Ginseng, Garlic and Ginkgo biloba to see how medicinal and traditional uses are described. David notMD (talk) 09:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Can I start my own newsletter?[edit] I was just wondering, is it possible for me to create my own Wikipedia newsletter? (It sounds like a fun project reporting what's going on in Wikipedia, but also difficult. And, I don't know if I even can.) WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 02:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) WaterflameIsAwesome, this is an encyclopedia. Fun is incidental. I suggest that you make a thousand or so substantial improvements to existing article -- improvements in the judgment of other editors, who build on your edits rather than reverting them. Then you can decide whether or not you want to create a newsletter. And if you still do, then after those thousand improvements you'll know what you're writing about. -- Hoary (talk) 02:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Ok, good idea. I just thought it would be something else to make Wikipedia worth my while. Because I'm not gonna sit around Wikipedia just editing articles all day. I just thought it would be a good break from doing my duty, but I'll try and get 1,000,000 edits before I start a newsletter. :/ WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 02:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Nobody expects you to edit articles all day. Your fellow-editors hope that the edits that you do make are improvements. (If one in fifty is mistaken, OK. If a substantial percentage are mistaken, not OK.) To take a break from improving articles, there are many possibilities, many of them away from your computer (or phone). -- Hoary (talk) 02:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I meant like other things on Wikipedia, not including away from WP. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 02:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) WaterflameIsAwesome, I think it's good to approach Wikipedia as a reader, and then, while you're reading, to encounter some kind of deficiency or irritation or other kind of problem -- and then not to rush in but to think about it: "Do I really know what's going on here? Am I sure that what I have in mind is an improvement?" When you are pretty confident that you can answer "yes and yes", improve it, carefully. This may take rather more time than you want to spend on it, but when it's done you'll be more confident of what you're doing. Look for opportunities to make similar improvements elsewhere. Soon you'll be pretty good at this, and fast, too. That will bring a feeling of satisfaction. (Just one thing: Avoid looking for "grammar mistakes". A certain kind of editor cites something written in an underinformed, silly book about grammar -- there are plenty of these, many of them from respected publishers -- and wastes lots of time inflicting some so-called "grammar rule" on perfectly good prose.) -- Hoary (talk) 07:34, 18 November 2021 (UTC) To @Hoary: WP:LIGHTENUP. To @WaterflameIsAwesome: check out Wikipedia:Department of Fun. ––FormalDude talk 02:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Bah, Hoary (talk) 05:15, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Getting to 1,000,000 edits is a reach. According to Wikipedia:List of Wikipedians by number of edits, only 13 people have surpassed that milestone. David notMD (talk) 09:45, 18 November 2021 (UTC) To WaterflameIsAwesome: if you're planning to write your own Wikipedia newsletter, and send it out to a mailing list that you maintain yourself, that's fine, I doubt anyone here can stop you. If you're planning to publish it using Wikipedia itself, you may encounter difficulties. Wikipedia has its own monthly newsletter, The Signpost, which used to have interesting articles about the running of Wikipedia, but has become anodyne since the Wikimedia Foundation starting influencing its contents. If your plan is to compete with The Signpost, I wish you success; but you're going to need some good high-level contacts to supply your information. Maproom (talk) 12:30, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I wasn't necessarily thinking about trying to compete with The Signpost. In fact, The Signpost is the whole reason I'm asking this question, lol (I hadn't heard of a newsletter until I discovered it). It wouldn't really have any other purpose than just discussing Wikipedia, and maybe a short "how-to" section or something like that. I might just merge multiple Wikipedia newspapers/newsletters into one, stating each story in my own words, with maybe some minor help from others. Just a fun project that I could work on for some free time on Wikipedia. For now, I think I might settle for putting some stories on my user page, as a starter. IF that's doable, of course. ;) WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 23:02, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Oh yeah, also @David notMD, I didn't literally mean one million edits. Also, am I the only one here who has a sense of sarcasm? WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 23:04, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Tips on creating a user page[edit] I need help on what I should add to my user page. I've created it, but I'm not sure what to do with it. Here it is: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:WaterflameIsAwesome WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) oh shoot I forgot my signature provides a link XD WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:23, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @WaterflameIsAwesome: you could add what you first edit was. You could add userboxes based off your interests; something maybe like sports. You can also add userboxes that say how many edits you have made etc. you can also look at my user page for an example and my userboxes that you might want to use. Kaleeb18 (talk) 03:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Oh ok thanks! I'll check it out. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:49, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Did You Know[edit] Can anyone here please tell me how I can find yesterday's DID YOU KNOW (17th Nov, 2021). I had seen about someone breastfeeding in the nursing room, in front of some males, and she was also a politician. Actually that is not the case, I want to find yesterday DID YOU KNOW. I cannot find it in the page history?? Cannot understand why. Please assist me in the following matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:02, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Here's the DYK archive for the current month, with links and search for the whole archive. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:10, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionhThanks a lot for helping me again. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:16, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh Yeah it was Susan Catania. I wanted to read about her. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:19, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Just so you know - the reason you couldn't find it in the history of the front page is that the Did You Know section is a template, rather than an article. So you'd have to check the history of the template rather than of the front page itself. DS (talk) 19:28, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I do not understand why a New York Times reference has been flagged as an unreliable source. Help?[edit]  Courtesy link: Martha Nothmann The source is: "A Nazi Legacy Haunts a Museum’s New Galleries", url https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/11/arts/design/kunsthaus-zurich-buhrle-collection.html The message I received was: "Ways to improve Martha Nothmann Hello, Eli185, Thank you for creating Martha Nothmann. I have tagged the page as having some issues to fix, as a part of our page curation process and note that: Many of the references are unreliable, such as the one from The New York Times The tags can be removed by you or another editor once the issues they mention are addressed. If you have questions, leave a comment here and begin it with @Qwerfjkl:. Remember to sign your reply with Eli185 (talk) 07:37, 18 November 2021 (UTC). For broader editing help, please visit the Teahouse. Delivered via the Page Curation tool, on behalf of the reviewer. Qwerfjkltalk 07:23, 18 November 2021 (UTC)" What am I supposed to do if a reviewer does not like the content of a NYT article about Nazi art looting in a Wikipedia article about a Jewish art collector? Eli185 (talk) 07:37, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Eli185, Qwerfjkl actually specified the NYT in their comment in your talk page. You responded by politely asking what was wrong with it. That was a good response. Now wait for the answer. (If no answer comes in a couple of days, then you'd be welcome to bring up the matter elsewhere.) -- Hoary (talk) 08:51, 18 November 2021 (UTC) How is everyones day[edit]  Dsmi3939 (talk) 08:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Uh I think this is not the right place to say this. The Teahouse is to ask questions about Wikipedia, not ask how everyone's day is. But, to reply to your message, I am fine. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:52, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism on page Kanchi Kamakoti Peetham by anonymous user ip[edit] An anonymous user 117.223.250.19 has deleted entire intro and writes propaganda. Pls help. Where should I report?Kannadiga kanmani Kannadiga kanmani (talk) 09:48, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I see only one edit (a large deletion) by that IP address, which you reverted. I suggest you put the article on your Watch list, but do not bother to warn or ask for a block on the IP unless this is repeated. David notMD (talk) 09:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Actually, this has gotten worse. The IP may have edited as 117.153.68.63, 117.249.143.61, 117.251.229.138 and 117.223.266.69. Peopel with disputes should discuss in Talk page of article. David notMD (talk) 01:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) How to move articles from sandbox to the main space[edit] kindly help me to move an article from my sandbox to the main space. User:Ngangaesther/sandbox Ngangaesther (talk) 10:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Please, see Wikipedia:So_you_made_a_userspace_draft#Ready!. Ruslik_Zero 12:52, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Editing the content of a page[edit] Good day, As the communication team of Societe Generale de Banque au Liban, we have noticed some wrong information in the presentation of our bank on Wikipedia. Can you kindly help us through the best procedure to amend the content without violating the page? i.e. an "allegation section" contains erupted information that we are seeking to remove. As for the introduction, we would like to bring some modifications reflecting the current description of our bank. Awaiting your kind feedback in order to bring the required amendments as soon as possible. Best regards, Christelle Feghaly Head of Press & Media Relations Cfeghaly (talk) 11:21, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Cfeghaly. Before you or anyone of your fellow team members try to edit the article about your bank, I strongly suggest you and they take the time to carefully read through Wikipedia:Conflict of interest, Wikipedia:Paid-contribution disclosure and Wikipedia:Plain and simple conflict of interest guide because they most certainly would apply to you or anyone else connected to the bank based upon what you posted above. Then, you probably should also take a close look at Wikipedia:Ownership of content because it's important for you and your fellow team members to understand that your bank doesn't not have any type of editorial control over what's written about it on Wikipedia. This doesn't mean that anyone can simple write whatever they want (good or bad) about the bank on Wikipedia, but it does mean that all content about the bank is going to be assessed in accordance with relevant Wikipedia policies and guidelines and may be considered acceptable even if it's not something the bank likes. -- Marchjuly (talk) 12:29, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Strong warnings have been placed on your Talk page about declaring paid situation and ceasing to edit the article directly. Same applies to User:Elite Moussa. David notMD (talk) 12:47, 18 November 2021 (UTC) That said, I did look at the article and to be frank, all I see is mention of an uncited allegation made by an unspecified "local newspaper", with two reasonable-looking sources denying that the allegation was incorrect. It makes me feel that the entire two sentence allegation section is quite possibly not appropriate in the article, and was done for POV purposes, and that it should be removed until better sources are found. The Press & Media Relations Team in the form of @Cfeghaly is advised to make an WP:EDITREQUEST on the talk page, detailed explicitly what changes they would seek other editors make for them. They can then investigate what, if any Reliable Sources have been published and make the changes accordingly. Declaring their Conflict of Interest in that edit and also on their Userpage would be important things to do, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 14:05, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Declined Article due to notability[edit] How do I make my subject notable, if i have added reliable sources? Jasminbrown1202 (talk) 14:40, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Jasminbrown1202 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. I assume this refers to Draft:Tonesa "FirstladyofBMF" Welch. You cannot make the subject notable, but you can demonstrate their notability with independent reliable sources with significant coverage of the person. Much of the draft is unsourced(see WP:REFB for assistance with citations). 331dot (talk) 14:46, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Also see Wikipedia:No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. Notability is something that the subject has, not the article. You need to demonstrate that the subject is themselves notable by citing sufficiently in-depth, independent, reliable sources where you got the information for writing the article from. See also WP:42 for a concise explanation. --Jayron32 15:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) So is the problem I need to add more sources inside of the article? The subject is notable. She was the head of the biggest drug trafficking and money laundering organization in the country. Everyone knows who BMF is. Big Meech and Southwest T. She is the longtime girlfriend of Southwest T and was on the indictment. She has had tv shows casted behind her role as well as a Documentary done on her through BET. I am not sure what else I should add. Perhaps those clips inside the article? — Preceding unsigned comment added by Jasminbrown1202 (talk • contribs) 15:23, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Jasminbrown1202, and welcome to the Teahouse. The points you mention in your last paragraph are all relevant to notability in the world, but not one of them is directly relevant to Wikipedia's criteria for notability, which are mostly to do with "is there enough independent material reliably published about this person to base an encyclopaedia article on?" Remember that Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. --ColinFine (talk) 16:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Cleaned up, and added Wikilink to Black Mafia Family. See Help:Referencing for beginners on how to convert URL refs to properly formatted refs. A suggestion: work on refs in your Sandbox, then move to article only when those are in good shape. Up to you to demonstrate that existing or additional refs are about Tonesa Welch. David notMD (talk) 17:31, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people on that Wikipedia page need to be guided through it?[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 15:35, 18 November 2021 (UTC) The relevant page is List of people from Merseyside. As you can see, ACtiling has made many edits to the page, with good intentions, but many have had to be reverted as they also removed people without any reason, and were misplaced. Any guidance from editors here that can be offered to this enthusiastic editor will, I'm sure, help. Ghmyrtle (talk) 15:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) ACtiling Please read the policy at WP:LISTPEOPLE.--Shantavira|feed me 16:09, 18 November 2021 (UTC) This is no longer necessary because the foundations are all for learning and solving problems. by human guides from problem solving and learning and taking reasonable time and facts without forcing or locking control. that future systems will have to run completely spontaneously according to my schedule. Headings can be just general topics. which, as always, repeats and loops — Preceding unsigned comment added by UFOINDY (talk • contribs) 02:55, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Edição[edit] Como editar um artigo? Artajeiro (talk) 15:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Google's Translation: Header: Edition Text: How to edit an article? ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 16:01, 18 November 2021 (UTC) This is the English language Wikipedia. Perhaps you are looking for the Portuguese Wikipedia? --David Biddulph (talk) 16:03, 18 November 2021 (UTC) List of countries[edit] List of countries with their first National Hockey League player - Chris Chelios was born in GREECE (please add this to the list) Cheers, Pat Reid  2001:1970:4CDD:200:2934:2AEC:4C57:DE2 (talk) 16:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please direct your comment to Talk:List of countries with their first National Hockey League player. There, the editors that follow that article will see it. 331dot (talk) 16:49, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Not according to Chris Chelios. --David Biddulph (talk) 16:50, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Edit to Atom (software)[edit] Can someone approve of my edit to atom (software) MCBOiS1210 (talk) 17:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) As far as I can see, MCBOiS1210, you have neither edited Atom (software) nor put a request on Talk:Atom (software). What are you trying to do? --ColinFine (talk) 17:10, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Evidently, I mean Talk:Atom (text editor). --ColinFine (talk) 17:13, 18 November 2021 (UTC) David Leigh Clark[edit] I have been asked to add info for my present Wikipedia reference (David Leigh Clark). I have used online instructions since computes became common but I cannot understand how to add a biography to my name. I registered for an account but need some help. I don't know what a TILDES is?  Pleh15 (talk) 18:07, 18 November 2021 (UTC) For information on not writing an autobiography, see WP:autobiography. To find out about a tilde, see tilde. --David Biddulph (talk) 18:16, 18 November 2021 (UTC)  Courtesy link: David Leigh Clark Wikignome Wintergreentalk 18:17, 18 November 2021 (UTC) "Tildes" is the plural of "Tilde". One tilde: ~ Two tildes: ~~ End a post to a talk page with four tildes, and the system will expand that into your signature plus a timestamp. DS (talk) 19:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) The article needs references that are ABOUT DLC. Referencing to journal articles he authored or co-authored does not confirm his notability. David notMD (talk) 22:46, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Dr. Vin Gupta[edit] Help with AfC for Dr. Vin Gupta Hello! I've had two experienced editors provide excellent feedback for an AfC for Vin Gupta, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Vin_Gupta They've both independently said they had hoped for one last editor to weigh in to ensure an "unbiased outcome" and since its been a few weeks, I was hopeful you might be willing to assist. Thank you again. Caroline grossman23 (talk) 18:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) It says: "Review waiting, please be patient. This may take 2 months or more, since drafts are reviewed in no specific order. There are 2,397 pending submissions waiting for review." Remember that there is no deadline. --David Biddulph (talk) 18:27, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Permission for a photo[edit] I want to add a photo to the article on my father, mathematician, Beresford Parlett. The original photographer of the photo is now deceased. Just to make sure, I contacted his widow and asked permission to use the photo for the Wikipedia site. She said "yes" to me verbally. However, when I tried to post the photo to the site it was later taken down. How do I get official permission to post this photo? SlamDunk2000 (talk) 18:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @SlamDunk2000:: Instructions are available at Wikipedia:Requesting copyright permission; there's a optional form letter for the copyright holder to complete and an email address to send the permission to where someone will verify the proper release of copyright. If you have more specific questions on how to navigate that page, please let us know. --Jayron32 18:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hi SlamDunk2000. What Jayron332 posted above is correct, and I've gone into a little more detail about this on your user talk page. I've also added some information about Wikipedia:Conflict of interest to your user talk page as well for reference. -- Marchjuly (talk) 21:54, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Need help to re-edit page to remove a content problem panel.[edit] Hi there. A panel has just appeared on my wiki page saying that some of the wording on my page is self-promoting for want of a better word. Could anyone help me go through my page and edit it so I can meet the guidelines and get this panel down? thanks! Page link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johanna_Spinks 107.185.204.212 (talk) 19:10, 18 November 2021 (UTC) It seems Njd-de is already working on cleaning up the page (thank you, Njd-de!). If you have further concerns or questions, there's always the article's talk page: Talk:Johanna Spinks. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 20:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Sumner bio[edit] It's okay with me if you delete the biography I wrote of myself. I am not a "notable" person and don't meet your guidelines. Indiana Author (talk) 19:41, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Indiana Author: The article was proposed for deletion shorty after you created it, but another editor stepped in, deprodded it and tried to improve it. Wikipedia generally tries to discourage people from creating articles about themselves as explained here and here because they often don't realize what it means to have a Wikipedia article written about them. If you're considered to be someone who doesn't meet any of Wikipedia's notability guidelines like WP:GNG, WP:NAUTHOR, or WP:NPROF, then that would be a valid reason for the article to be deleted. If you just want the article to be deleted because you feel you made a mistake in creating it and are concerned it may somehow have real world implications, then you might also be able to request a courtesy deletion. Otherwise, it might be hard to have the article deleted at this point if other editors are actively working on trying to improve it and feel you actually are Wikipedia notable enough to have an article created about you. The best thing to do might be to seek further assistance at Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons/Noticeboard or Wikipedia:Administrators' noticeboard. -- Marchjuly (talk) 22:26, 18 November 2021 (UTC) If you think it should be deleted, see WP:G7. ? Qwerfjkltalk 15:55, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Edit reversion[edit] FYI?– Separated from above section. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 19:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) So this user reverted my edit to Sir Keir's talk-page and I saw red and added in the link I posted on the talk page on the mainspace (along with an edit summary basically slandering him) which I'd added in the hopes of generating some kind of discussion. Obviously I feel a little foolish about this and wish I hadn't done it. What can I do to make amends? Phil of rel (talk) 19:46, 18 November 2021 (UTC) "spamming"[edit] You asked me to "stop spamming my book." I will comply. However, I defend all the changes I made as factually accurate and documented in the University of Chicago Archives, where I did most of the research for my book on Amos Alonzo Stagg. David E. Sumner, PhD Indiana Author (talk) 19:47, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Even if there was nothing wrong with the additions, hopefully you can understand the conflict of interest, and that Wikipedia edits should be made by people independent of the subject. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 19:57, 18 November 2021 (UTC) For context, I am the user who called his edits spam. user:Indiana Author wrote the autobiographical article David E. Sumner without disclosing his conflict of interest, and then mentioned his recent book in something like 30 different articles at his "publisher's suggestion" [1]. Meters (talk) 20:06, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Indiana Author. Please understand that WP:CITESPAM and WP:BOOKSPAM are problems that the Wikipedia Community is dealing with on a daily basis. It's not impossible to cite one's self in a Wikipedia article, but it is a form of conflict of interest that needs to be done carefully. If the content you're referring above can be found in the University of Chicago archives, then it might be possible to simply cite the archives itself instead of your book. This might not be what your publisher wants, but it might be the best thing for Wikipedia and that matters more. Please take a look at WP:CITINGSOURCES and WP:RELIABLESOURCES for some more general information on this or try asking at Wikipedia:Reliable sources/Noticeboard if you've got any specific questions. -- Marchjuly (talk) 22:04, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I agree 100% with Meters. STOP adding your book to articles. EVERY ONE had been reverted. David notMD (talk) 22:53, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you to all the authors and editors who work or volunteer with Wikipedia to make it reliable and accurate. I use it regularly in my research for a quick reference source and will continue to do so. - David — Preceding unsigned comment added by Indiana Author (talk • contribs) 00:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) How many edits?[edit] What is the easy way to determine exactly how many edits ANOTHER editor (other than yourself) has done lifetime to date? I know how to find my own edits, but another editor is the question. Should be an easy one. First to answer gets a cookie. cookie ? Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 21:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Th78blue: You can go to that user's contribution page and then click the edit count link at the bottom. That will lead to a page like this: [2] with various edit count stats. RudolfRed (talk) 22:13, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Th78blue Hi there. Go to that persons User page or Talk page and (in desktop mode) look on the far left side of the page in the section headed 'Tools'. Then click 'User contributions'. At the page that appears, scroll right to the bottom and click 'Edit count'. This displays a very helpful page summarising all of the edits made by that user in various parts of Wikipedia. In your case, you've made 5,666 edits at the time of posting this. (See here). Once you have the url for xtools, you can replace your own username with that of any other user - assuming you can remember the link. E.g. https://xtools.wmflabs.org/ec/en.wikipedia.org/Th78blue; https://xtools.wmflabs.org/ec/en.wikipedia.org/Nick_Moyes; https://xtools.wmflabs.org/ec/en.wikipedia.org/RudolfRed etc.Nick Moyes (talk) 22:15, 18 November 2021 (UTC) You're both getting cookies! Thanks! Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 22:38, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Okay, one more follow up question for @Nick Moyes: actually (since you're so detailed too!) ?, can you tell me what are "deleted edits? I see in peoples "edit counts" both "Live edits" and "deleted edits"? Thanks! Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 00:31, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Th78blue: If you enable "Navigation popups:" at Special:Preferences#mw-prefsection-gadgets then you can see the edit count (and many other things) just by hovering over a linked username. Deleted edits are edits to currently deleted pages, and edits which have been hidden in the page history (revision deletion). PrimeHunter (talk) 02:02, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Citation help needed[edit] Hey there! Looking for some help navigating a citation issue. I have been adding content and thus additional citations to the page on Catherine Parr (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catherine_Parr). However, my citations are not automatically populating in the reference list as they should. I am wondering why this is happening and if someone could assist me. I have done every tutorial and read every article on wikipedia citations and I sought help on Teahouse but am still stumped. If someone is able to help by explaining it to me like I'm five, I would really appreciate it! Thanks. DrMichelineWhite (talk) 22:17, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DrMichelineWhite. It looks like you asked something similar before at Wikipedia:Teahouse/Questions/Archive 1130#Citations not populating in reference list. Did you see the replies you received? Did the suggestions given not work? It appears that you've made a number of edits to Catherine Parr since August and that , you might have unintentionally damaged the syntax of citations previously added by others with this edit. That is probably why there are now "error" messages are visible in Catherine Parr#Citations since there were no such messages visible in the version prior to your October 1 edit. Adding citations to an article can be tricky to do in some cases when a complicated citation style like WP:SFN has been previously adopted. It's not generally a good idea to try and use multiple citation styles in an article per WP:CITEVAR which means you might've have to figure out a way to incorporate the citations you want to add into the article using the already established style. Perhaps the the best thing to do would be to ask for assistance at Talk:Catherine Parr because that's where you're likely going to find editors who might be able to help you do so if you're unable to figure things out yourself. Finally, please also take a look at WP:EXPERT and WP:CITESELF as well for reference since they might also apply to your situation. -- Marchjuly (talk) 22:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Revision history[edit] Yes, I just wanted to know, what's the actual point/benefit of having an articles revision history publicly available going back to the creation of the article, doesn't it just take up more space? And also, what's the oldest revision of any article that's still available on the en.wikipedia.org database? Are there any still accessible publicly going back 20 years ago to 2001? Thanks Hgh1985 (talk) 00:35, 19 November 2021 (UTC) hi Hgh1985 and welcome to the teahouse! simply put: transparency and proper attribution. while it may be hard to find due to how it works, you'd technically be able to figure out who contributed which to the article even back to edits made back in the early years of wikipedia. happy editing!  melecie  t - 01:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Hgh1985: Special:Diff/908493298 is the oldest edit to Wikipedia, from back on January 15, 2001. All the revisions do take up space, but the usefulness of having old revisions outweighs the small-in-the-grand-scheme-of-things cost of keeping them around. Vahurzpu (talk) 01:31, 19 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) :Hello, Hgh1985. The text of each Wikipedia page is both copyrighted and freely licensed for re-use by anyone. The copyright is not held by Wikipedia or the Wikimedia Foundation. The copyright is held by the individual editors who wrote the article. The free license requires attribution to the authors, and one of the functions of the revision history is to provide that attribution. Another function is the ability to correct articles which have become severely damaged by things like copyright violations, libel or threats of violence. An editor can go back through the revision history, find the last undamaged version, and revert to that version. An administrator can hide the damaged versions. So, all of this has legal implications, and data storage is dirt cheap. The software used to run Wikipedia in its early months did not track the revision history but the overwhelming majority of edits are available for review. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 01:34, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Hgh1985: (edit conflict) Our license legally requires that contributions by individual editors to a page can be found. MediaWiki:Wikimedia-copyrightwarning is displayed above the publish button. The database only stores diffs for the revision history. mw:Manual:MediaWiki architecture#Database and text storage says: "The compression ratio achieved on Wikimedia sites nears 98%." It's also useful. I often look far back in page histories to for example see where a problem started, who started it and what else they have done, and whether there is a good earlier version to partially or fully revert to. PrimeHunter (talk) 01:47, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Visual editor creates bugs in refs[edit] Tracked in Phabricator Task T296044 I have noticed that since a few hours, my edits using the Visual Editor create some bugs in the references, both in the English and French WP, e.g. here, here, here. It happens wherever I edit in the article. Is it normal or is it just me? Veverve (talk) 00:35, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Veverve, it's a known and recent bug associated with VisualEditor; see discussion at Wikipedia:Village pump (technical)#VisualEditor duplicating named citations and the Phabicrator task at phab:T296044. DanCherek (talk) 00:43, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Is this allowed or not[edit] Am I allowed to produce an article without any citations? I have been trying to improve the draft [ Draft:Mall of the North ] with reliable sources but I can't seem to find any although the shopping mall is a notable place in the Southern Africa or more specifically South Africa, I have seen few articles with in the main space without any citations and I asked myself if I'm missing something or not (and some with only one or two cites), for an example check out Tsunade, the article has absolutely no source. I was wondering if I would be penalized (blocked or something) if did the same since I cannot find reliable sources to cite Mall of the North. Motlatlaneo (talk) 02:22, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Motlatlaneo! All articles need to be supported by citations to reliable sources. Notability itself is generally determined based on the amount of significant coverage that a topic has received in reliable, independent secondary sources. Yes, there are some existing articles with poor or nonexistent sourcing – the solution is not to create more unsourced articles, but rather to improve those unsourced articles (or delete/redirect them if necessary). You're unlikely to be blocked for creating a single unsourced article, but it might be moved back to draftspace or nominated for deletion if there are no references to demonstrate its notability. Hope that helps. DanCherek (talk) 03:06, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Motlatlaneo I Googled Mall of the North to see if I could find some references for you, and discovered that the first half of your draft article was copied from the Mall's website, the only change being that you wrote "The offers" instead of "Our offers". Once you find good sources for your article it's important that you not copy and paste other's writing word for word, but instead use your own words to tell what you have read. It may be helpful for you to read Wikipedia:Copyright violations to learn more about the importance of not violating any copyright laws. Best wishes on improving your draft article. Karenthewriter (talk) 03:25, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Karenthewriter I have studied the wiki rules and yes I have to admit that was wrong. I'm willing to use my own words so what hoping you'd tell me is that you found something to cite of which you didn't, which means the really isn't anything out there but the mall widely notable — Preceding unsigned comment added by Motlatlaneo (talk • contribs) 03:49, 19 November 2021 (UTC) User Rights[edit] I want to know all about user rights, and know how many of them are there, and what are they. Any assistance. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 02:50, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Itcouldbepossible! Wikipedia:User access levels is a pretty comprehensive source of information about the different user rights on the English Wikipedia. Feel free to ask any follow up questions you have here! DanCherek (talk) 02:56, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks for your help. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 03:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Should I also read the sub-pages, like Further information: Wikipedia:Administration § Human and legal administration??? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 03:11, 19 November 2021 (UTC) That depends on how much time you want to spend reading and how much detail you want to go into If it looks interesting to you, go ahead. You shouldn't feel like you need to read every single information page to be a good editor, though. I don't think that Wikipedia:Administration is one that I myself have read before. DanCherek (talk) 03:17, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks I would try and read everything, if I can. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 03:21, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Someone deleted my comments on a talk page[edit] I'm still a new editor but someone has reverted my talk page comments[3], is this permitted on wikipedia? Thanks in advance. SmolBrane (talk) 02:50, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @SmolBrane As far as I see, your issue has been addressed. See this diff ([4]). Maybe it was an accidental removal. Actually you see, those who do this reverts, or rollbacks, they sometimes make mistakes, because they have to look over so many things, and they sometimes tend to make mistakes. Hope that helps!!!. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 03:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ahhh that makes sense, thank you! SmolBrane (talk) 03:31, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Contributions to Signature[edit] I have seen many who have a contributions section along with their signature. I also want to enable that settings. Can anyone here assist me, on how I can add a contributions tab in my signature?  Itcouldbepossible (talk) 02:52, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Sure – WP:SIG § CustomSig tells you how to customise your signature in preferences (please read the policies and guidelines before trying anything too fancy) and you can link to your contributions using [[Special:Contributions/Itcouldbepossible]]. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 06:13, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh Thanks I will read and do the necessary. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:52, 19 November 2021 (UTC) If a user requests that something is added on a talk page and I (or someone else) has done it, can the request be deleted? Is not, what should be done?[edit] I have noticed some talk pages have sections such as "can x be added to this page?", "y is missing, can it be added?", etc. If I or someone else adds the requested bit of information, what is an acceptable action to take regarding the user's section? I feel that too many redundant and outdated sections can clog up the page, but I'm not sure what is acceptable to do in this case. ReidMoffat (talk) 05:36, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @ReidMoffat: WP:TALK has the general guidelines on talk pages; it's generally better to archive rather than delete discussions or requests that have concluded. Many talk pages are automatically archived by bots; these can be identified by a box at the top of the page indicating that it gets archived. There is also a range of icons that editors use to mark whether a task is done or in progress – {{Done}} shows you the available icons. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 06:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @ReidMoffat: You should find some information in WP:ERREQ and on the documentation page for Template:Request edit about this. The template {{Done}} is OK for many cases, but it's probably better to follow the instructions at Template:Request edit#Response options because of the peculiarities of that particular template's syntax and how edit requests made using it are categorized. Regardless, you shouldn't remove or otherwise modify the posts made by other editors from talk page as pointed out above by ClaudineChionh, except in some certain specific cases like the ones listed in WP:TPO. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:45, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Repeated requests for logins[edit] In the past 30 days, when I enter Wikipedia each day, I notice that I'm not logged in even though each day this appear, I login and check the block "Keep me logged in for 365 days". I'm using a password that was NOT automatically generated by either the Wikipedia software nor by my browser (Chrome). I'm running an iMac under Apple's OSX 10.13.6 and using Google Chrome as a default browser Version 96.0.4664.55 (Official Build) (x86_64) as I have been for several years without this problem. Any suggestions? "What fun would there be if we already knew all there is to know?" 07:39, 19 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by Magillaonfire (talk • contribs) This has been answered at the Help Desk. Magillaonfire, please limit your question to either here or the Help Desk to prevent redundant editor effort. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 08:35, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the not-so-very-helpful reply. I did that hoping that someone in either location would have an answer. Nothing has been changed in either my OS or in my browser settings but I guess I'll just have to take your gentle slap-on-the-nose-with-a-rolled-up-newspaper and go back and check something I've already checked at least twice. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Magillaonfire (talk • contribs) 23:59, 19 November 2021 (UTC) You're welcome. If you still don't get a suitable reply by the time that question is archived, try asking at WP:VPT. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 05:57, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Adding well-referenced negative facts[edit] Hello, I would like to know whether my edits are applicable or not. They are well referenced and I have tried my best to have a neutral tone. Factually, the edits state bad facts, but are rewritten from third-party sources, including major publications like The New York Times. Please vote: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure#Controversies%2FNegative_Facts https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock#Controversies%2FNegative_Facts Centrereded (talk) 09:08, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Centrereded (talk) 09:08, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded I have only checked the second article. When your edit was reverted you were told about WP:BRD and asked to form consensus on the talk page. Instead, you asked there, and here, "What is wrong with my edits?" The answer is that there may or may not be anything wrong with them, but you have been asked to build consensus. So please seek to do that. That does not mean asking what is wrong, it means putting the case for your edits. There is a huge difference. FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 09:20, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded Note, please, This COIN discussion FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 09:23, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @User:Timtrent How do I reach a consensus? I asked people to vote. What's the official way?Centrereded (talk) 10:17, 19 November 2021 (UTC) You started discussions on the Talk pages of those two articles on 19 Nov. For both, you should invite the editors who reverted your repeated attempts to add Controversy sections to the articles, as their Edit summaries were critical of your content and/or referencing. There is no rush. I also have a concern, in that on the Talk pages, you wrote " The words are originally not mine, but from the referenced." Does this mean you are copy/pasting content from the sources? David notMD (talk) 11:25, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded What we are aiming for is a friendly, balanced discussion. Usually, these are informal, with one set fo views holding sway. This builds a simple consensus. We may not agree with a consensus, but we must honour it. If you find that consensus goes against you, and it can, but you feel that your arguments have validity, you can take it further to seek to reach a formal consensus. This is, generally, frowned upon if one has not attempted a simple consensus first. All editors have the right to seek to have their views prevail. No-one of us carries more clout than another of us. One editor equals one opinion, however, consensus is not a ballot, not a beauty pageant. It is the arguments that build consensus, not weight of numbers. Therefore one may ask for an uninvolved editor to "close" any discussion, not necessarily admins. FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 16:42, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Copyright issue[edit] Hi, I am a bit overwhelmed by the huge set of rules on how to report a copyright issue, so I figured I'd just leave it here FYI, and you can do what you will with it. :-) On the German Wikipedia, we have just had to delete a large number of articles by this user. He contributes in at least ten different languages, and his language proficiency in most of these may be doubted. The German articles at least were machine generated, and some of them were barely comprehensible. Since there were only sources given in Azerbaijani language, this was nearly impossible to fix. Now for the copyright issue: The user apparently machine translates snippets from this source and turns them into Wikipedia articles. His necropolis articles at least seem to have evolved that way. The source itself includes a copyright sign and no indication of Creative Commons licensing, so I don't see how this would be public domain material. As the English necropolis articles by this user are nearly identical, I assume that he has used the same method here, maybe - with a little more knowledge of English than German - smoothing things out a little more.  91.34.32.188 (talk) 11:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) FYI - User:Elmar Bax??liyev was indef blocked in 2018 for repeated copyright violations, unblocked in Sept 2021. Since then, has created more than 30 articles in English Wikipedia about archeological sites, some as short as a few sentences with 1-2 refs. The unanswered question is whether EB has returned to copy/translate/paste. David notMD (talk) 11:38, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Definitely. Just throw the appropriate parts from that source into Google Translate, and the result is clear as day. Even though Google Translate does struggle more with the Azerbaijani language than whatever machine this user has been using. --91.34.32.188 (talk) 12:21, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks @91.34.32.188 for bringing this up. If you compare e.g. en:Arat?p? necropolis with az:Arat?p? nekropolu with [5] page 60 Nr. 105 ?r?t?p? n?kr?p?lu its obviously copyvio. I deleted 14 articles of this user in deWP about necropolises as copyright violation from this source. Johannnes89 (talk) 12:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Joe as the admin who unblocked this user -- FYI. --91.34.32.188 (talk) 12:30, 19 November 2021 (UTC) FYI: Elmar Bax??liyev (talk · contribs) indeffed by ToBeFree for copyright violations after a previous indef block for the same issiue. Victor Schmidt (talk) 15:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Maybe someone would care to have a look at the Commons images used by this user, uploaded by another user by the name of Etiunian. I know this is not Commons here, but I have serious doubts as to the copyright situation of those images. Many of them look like scans from books to me. I asked at the Commons "Village pump" about this but didn't get a reply so far. --91.34.32.188 (talk) 21:18, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Why is my Talk Page post in italics?[edit] Hi there, I recently made a new post/section on a Talk Page, and I was wondering why the entire thing is in italics? I tried looking through a few documentation pages, but couldn't seem to find any answers. The post in question is here: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ulrich_Kutschera#Kutschera_2021_article_-_%22Sex_and_Covid-19%22_%28ref._34%29 Thanks for your help! NeuroJasper (talk) 12:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) User:PrincessPersnickety fixed it. David notMD (talk) 13:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi User:NeuroJasper. The post above yours on the talk page used italics, but was missing the code to change it back to normal. Princess Persnickety (talk) 13:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you, User:PrincessPersnickety! I've checked out the revision history to see what you changed, so I can hopefully avoid similar problems in the future. I'll be sure to keep an eye out for angled brackets as one possible cause, the next time I encounter something like this. :) NeuroJasper (talk) 13:09, 19 November 2021 (UTC) You're welcome :) I only know because I encountered the same problem myself a while ago when all my text came out tiny and I couldn't figure out why. Princess Persnickety (talk) 13:13, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Can someone tell me how my draft is looking please?[edit] Hey all, Sorry, first time here and still trying to get used to the Wikipedia layout. May someone please check my recent draft? I've tried to follow all guidelines possible but just want to make sure I'm on the right page. Many thanks Southpointmusic (talk) 15:19, 19 November 2021 (UTC)  Courtesy link: Draft:Southpoint (Record Label) Hi @Southpointmusic! You've successfully submitted your draft, so someone will come along to review it. We have a backlog, so it might take a while, but check back periodically. Cheers, {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 15:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) See your Talk page for explanation for the draft being nominated for Speedy deletion, and the path open to you to appeal the indefinite block of your previous User name. David notMD (talk) 17:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Clarification on dispute resolution[edit] I am headed toward dispute resolution with another editor and, as a relatively new contributor/editor, I want to be clear on the procedure. I had initiated the discussion with him on our individual talk pages because looking at the article talk page there was nothing like a previous us of the page for dispute resolution, nothing much on the page at all. I thought that we could do best talking with each other directly, which we did civilly and thoroughly through the deletion of my original edit, my following his advice in a second edit which was then immed. deleted, etc. ( won't further litigate it here). I see that dispute resolution instructions say "Before making a request here, be sure that the issue has been thoroughly discussed on the article talk page. 3O is only for assistance in resolving disagreements that have come to a standstill." - which this has come to. This has not been on the article talk page, I see no way of productively putting it there at this point. Can I take it to dispute directly from our already existing discussion? I intend to follow the problem to its resolution by a third party or parties. Thank you in advance. Vabookwriter (talk) 15:45, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Vabookwriter (talk) 15:45, 19 November 2021 (UTC) More on dispute question[edit] My confusion is in part because of this kind of inconsistent instruction: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Dispute_resolution There are many methods on Wikipedia for resolving disputes. Most methods are not formal processes and do not involve third-party intervention. Respond to all disputes or grievances, in the first instance, by approaching the editor or editors concerned and explaining which of their edits you object to and why you object. Use the article talk page or their user talk page to do so; be civil, polite, and always assume good faith. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Dispute_resolution_noticeboard/request?withJS=MediaWiki:DRN-wizard.js&withCSS=MediaWiki:DRN-wizard.css Has this issue been discussed extensively on the article talk page? (If you don't know what an article talk page is, answer "Not yet".) Thank you Vabookwriter (talk) 16:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Vabookwriter. Disputes about article content should always be discussed thoroughly on the article talk page before beginning other forms of dispute resolution. Other editors interested in that article will not know what has been said on two editor's talk pages. So, have the conversation in the correct place first before trying anything else. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 16:20, 19 November 2021 (UTC) New page[edit] how to write a new page . Thanks Lelemera (talk) 16:33, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Follow the instructions here. Polyamorph (talk) 17:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lelemera, and welcome to the Teahouse. I will add something to what Polyamorph said: new editors who try to create encyclopaedia articles before they have learnt how Wikipedia works often have a disappointing and frustrating experience, and end up wasting a lot of their own time, and other people's time. My advice to new editors who want to create an article is to put the idea aside for at least six months while you "learn the craft" of editing Wikipedia, by making small improvements to some of our existing six million articles. --ColinFine (talk) 17:19, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Adminstats[edit] Hello I placed administats Template on my userpage 2days ago still not created by the bot. ? ??? ?????? (talk) 17:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) ? ??? ?????? (talk) 17:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) The bot will not process the template on your userpage because you are not an admin. Polyamorph (talk) 17:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) What to do if wording does not reflect cited source?[edit] What to do if wording does not reflect cited source? I'm trying to help clean up some parts of the feminism article that have been changed/added since it received GA status 10 years ago. The second sentence of the article cites a source which, upon checking, does not say what what was written. It seems (to me) to reflect someone's own opinion rather than the source, and I'm also aware that what's on Wikipedia shouldn't copy verbatim. How should I address this? (I've already posted on the talk page about several issues, though not this one in particular, and have received limited feedback). Pernicious.Editor (talk) 18:11, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Pernicious.Editor: Welcome to the Teahouse. If something appears to be editorial opinion, you can boldly remove it. Alternatively, if you would like readers and interested editors to be aware of the problem, you can add a {{failed verification}} template right after the contentious passage. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 20:10, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Would you like to review my draft on "Autism in China"?[edit] Dear all, My draft article page on "Autism in China": https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Autism_in_China#Diagnosis I am drafting a Wikipedia article on "Autism in China", a topic which I believe has notability and which should have its own article, since there are few attempts to synthesize information on this topic. It is my first time ever writing an article though, so may I ask if someone would like to make suggestions on: 1) Organization (Overview — Epidemiology — History and progress, etc.) 2) Grammar and tense (should I stick with present tense throughout?) 3) Sources and citations 4) I tried to upload a poster image of the movie "Ocean Heaven" to the Media coverage— Ocean Heaven section, but it says I don't have the copyright. What should I do? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ocean-heaven-chinese-movie-poster.jpeg (this is the file link) Thanks in advance!! Ha.susulat (talk) 19:48, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Ha.susulat Welcome to the Teahouse. Firstly, well done on getting as far as you have with a Draft article as a brand new user. That's no mean feat in itself. It's not yet in a form where it could be properly 'reviewed', so I have a mix of general comments which I hope may assist you: Firstly, I looked to see what other 'Autism in ....' article there were, and only found Autism in india, which then redirects one to Global perceptions of autism. I presume you were aware of that article? If not, you should perhaps ensure that that page is up to date in the relevant section, or add a subsection for China. It is always possible to add a 'See main article' link to then take a user to a more detailed page. And that, I assume, is what your draft would cover?. It's important not to add general things into a detailed article which ought to have been covered elsewhere. So just use wikilinks to tie these together. Only explain diagnosis procedures if they are remarkably different from elsewhere. If they are, ensure you use reliable source to demonstrate how those procedures differ. (I did think that section was too lengthy) Forget trying to use images with special non-free image rationales in draft articles. Images can be added later, and have no impact on whether a page reaches our bar for Notability. I have now just appreciated that you asked a very similar question a few days ago (now archived here). I can probably add little to what you were told, especially to seek input from editors at WP:WikiProject Autism. I don't think you are wasting your time with this draft, but there is much work still to do before it could be properly reviewed as an article. Seeking feedback or input into the Draft from more specialist editors is probably the right way to go, yet I don't see you having asked there yet. Finally, and out of interest, are you doing this out of general concern, or for a college project, or in order to raise awareness of specific organisations that you represent? It might be a good idea to introduce yourself on your userpage and explain your interests in editing Wikipedia on this topic. There's further advice at WP:COI for anyone already working inside the autism field to make clear their involvement. That won't stop you editing, but we always aim for openness here. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 20:35, 19 November 2021 (UTC) I remember there's an essay on X about Y and how those articles should only be created when the combination of the two topics is notable. Can't remember though. Sungodtemple (talk) 21:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Stub pages[edit] I know I might be taking on a project that I may regret doing (lol) but here we go. I've noticed a plethora of stub pages, especially regarding early 20th century and late 19th century baseball players. I was curious if there is an exact list of how many of these are stubs. I have plenty of resources (meaning websites and books) where I can flesh out a great number of these pages. Keep in mind I'm focusing on the above target and stub pages for current and former NFL players only. Is there a page I can use as a guide for this rather large task?  Sportsfan1976 I'm only here because I'm not currently somewhere else. (talk) 21:17, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Sportsfan1976. Category: Baseball stubs would be a good place to start. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 21:24, 19 November 2021 (UTC) 7M Pages[edit] About when would Wikipedia reach 7 million pages? We're currently almost at 6.5 million pages, and by the looks of it, Wikipedia looks like it could either reach 7M by early-mid 2022, or late 2022-early2023. How long did it take for Wikipedia to get from 5M to 6M? WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:36, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @WaterflameIsAwesome: Welcome to the teahouse. To date, we've reached 6.4 million articles, and so far I'm thinking we can reach to 7 million articles by mid, late 2022. But if article creation increases rapidly, we can reach 7 million by mid 2022. However, if it goes slow, (which I don't expect) we will reach at this point by 2023. Also, for the 5-6M, we aren't sure about this one. But, if wikipedia was made 19 years ago, (19 divided by 5-6 =3-4) I'm estimating to reach either 3 to 4 years. Severestorm28 (talk) 22:47, 19 November 2021 (UTC) English Wikipedia reached five million articles on 1 November 2015, and six million on 23 January 2020. --bonadea contributions talk 23:09, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Bonadea: That would take 5 years. Severestorm28 (talk) 23:36, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ok, so if we're going at the speed of 5-6 million, then I'm guessing maybe 3 more years? lol. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 00:47, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Severestorm28 that would actually take a little over four years. November 1st of 2015 is closer to January 1st 2016 than same date 2015, so it's a little over four years, rather than a little under five years. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:10, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @WaterflameIsAwesome: That's true. Severestorm28 (talk) 18:56, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Archived URLs[edit] How do I know if a website URL has been archived or not? Kaleeb18 (talk) 23:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Kaleeb18: You could always go to archive.org and search for the URL. In the context of references on Wikipedia, there is a tool to automatically add the archive URL into the citation temple. Go to the "View history" tab on any article and click the "Fix dead links" button to access the tool. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 00:59, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Ganbaruby: Thank you so much I found exactly what I needed; that tool saved me a lot of time and work I would've had to do. Kaleeb18 (talk) 04:35, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Watchlists of other editors[edit] I have learned how to see your own edit counts, and the edit counts of other editors etc. But is it possible to see what is on the watchlists of other editors? Thanks! Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 00:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Th78blue! See Help:Watchlist#Privacy. You can't see the contents of other editors' watchlists, and other editors—including administrators—cannot view the contents of your watchlist. Developers who have access to the servers that hold the Wikipedia database can obtain this information. DanCherek (talk) 00:27, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks! That answered my question! Do I then delete this from the "teahouse" since my question is now answered? Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 00:35, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Great! This thread can be left as is, since it might help other editors who have the same question, and a bot will archive it in a couple days. DanCherek (talk) 00:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) PLEASE ACCEPT MY ARTICLE CREATION I WANT TO MAKE ARTICLE WHO POLITICIAN AND CELEBRATIS PERSON[edit] Hi I'm khogendra Rupini i want to create celebrities Article in Wikipedia and i have a one question why Wikipedia decline my article KhogendrarupiniKdr12 (talk) 01:21, 20 November 2021 (UTC)khogendrarupini See the explanation at User_talk:KhogendrarupiniKdr12. You cannot use Wikipedia for promotion. RudolfRed (talk) 01:23, 20 November 2021 (UTC) And please don't shout. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 02:27, 20 November 2021 (UTC) OP has been blocked as a sockpuppet. --Kinu t/c 03:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @KhogendrarupiniKdr12 please be more mature in your Teahouse questions. Shouting is a big no-no as well. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:08, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How do I know if a page is full?[edit] I thought I was getting proficient with Wikipedia, but lately, my edits have been consistently rejected. Wondering what to do and how to contribute more to pages of my interest. Smcupcake19 (talk) 01:34, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Smcupcake19: Wikipedia is not made of paper, so it doesn't really get "full". However, a brief look at your talk page shows that you have been involved in some long and heated debates about Scrappy-Doo and Draft:Scrappy-Doo Biography. Did you have specific questions about the advice that was given to you on those articles' talk pages, or questions about another aspect of editing Wikipedia? ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 01:47, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, the Scrappy debate was specifically where I wanted feedback. I truly do want to make that page look as good as I can; and I was specifically wondering what kinds of edits would be indubitably welcome, since after initial smooth sailing with my endeavor, as I mentioned above my edits now appear to be quickly deleted, even after making several attempts to compromise. After putting a special amount of effort to keep my most recent edit inoffensive and still finding it quickly deemed unacceptable. I'd just like to know how to make sure my edits can have some reliable permanence; doing so is becoming increasingly elusive.--Smcupcake19 (talk) 04:48, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Talk:Scrappy-Doo makes clear that your efforts on Scrappy-Doo and Draft:Scrappy-Doo Biography have run aground on various issues, including copyright and fancruft. I suggest you read Wikipedia:Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass and some of the links therein. Perhaps, after more than a year at this task, you consider other topics, animated or not. David notMD (talk) 10:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Which tag to use for page protect?[edit] Which tag to use for page protect? Coolblack4 (talk) 02:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Coolblack4: You can request page protection at the requests for page protection noticeboard, after you have read the instructions at the top of this page as well as the protection policy. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 02:24, 20 November 2021 (UTC) DS Alert regarding Arab–Israeli conflict[edit] Hi, I have received a DS Alert regarding the Arab–Israeli conflict, but I have made no edits regarding that topic whatsoever. WarKosign who issued the alert previously reverted an edit I made adding Mandaeans to 'See Also' section at the bottom of the Israelites article. I explained to them that scholars see Mandaeans being likely of Judean/Jewish origin and received a DS Alert shortly afterwards regarding the Arab-Israeli conflict. I don't see how the two topics are related. I have left a message on their talk page but have not received a reply. Can you please advise on how to resolve this issue. Thanks. Mcvti (talk) 02:18, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hi @Mcvti! The idea of something being related to the Arab–Israeli conflict is interpreted extremely loosely, so an article like Israelites would probably qualify. DS Alerts, while they might look scary, mean what they say that you haven't done anything wrong, so there's not any issue that you have to worry about resolving. It's just a "heads up, this is a sensitive topic area, so please be cautious". Feel free to carry on editing! Cheers, {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 02:50, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Logo Update Not Appearing in Article[edit] I recently have been updating Major Arena Soccer League and tried to update the league's logo by uploading the logo's .svg as a new version of the existing logo. It seems to work, but the thumbnail of the current logo in the file history and it's representation in the article itself seem to be the old logo. The non-free use rationale and the licensing should be identical as the existing logo, so I'm confused at what I need to do to make the logo on the article update. Logo in question: File:Major Arena Soccer League logo.svg  Packerfan213 (talk) 04:09, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Packerfan213: The logo seems to be appearing in the article now, but a couple of other things for reference. Please don't display non-free content anywhere other than the article namespace per non-free content use criterion #9. If you want to discuss a non-free file, provide a link to it instead as explained here. Please don't overwrite a file like you did in this case except for only minor changes like a size reduction, straightening, minor coloring change, etc. When a logo completely changes like what seems to be the case here, it's better to upload it as a completely new file altogether. Another reason for doing this is related to #3 below. This new version of the logo seems like it might actually not need to be licensed as non-free per c:COM:TOO United States and wordmark. All-text logos tend to be considered too simple for copyright protection in the United States; so, you actually might be able to upload this to Commons instead of Wikipedia under a license of c:Template:PD-textlogo. You might want to ask about this at c:COM:VPC just to make sure, but I think it should be OK for Commons. — Marchjuly (talk) 04:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Marchjuly: Thanks for the quick reply! Is there any way for an admin to delete the file history of the old logo to keep it at just the original then? I'll go to Commons and make a new file upload with the proper licensing info; I made a similar upload for the text based logo of the Milwaukee Wave. Packerfan213 (talk) 04:43, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Just revert back to the original version and add {{furd}} to the top of the file's page. The will mark the unused revisions of the file for speedy deletion per WP:F5. — Marchjuly (talk) 04:58, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks again! Sorry for making a mess out of that file's history, but everything should be sorted now I hope. Packerfan213 (talk) 05:10, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hey, I need help...[edit]  User98207252129 (talk) 05:13, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hey, I have a question, where can I report a Vandalism I saw in an article from Sinterklaas? If you go to this link and see the left side of the revision. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sinterklaas&type=revision&diff=1056159685&oldid=1056159438 by 184.16.185.34 (talk+ · tag · contribs · filter log · WHOIS · RBLs · proxy check · block user · block log · cross-wiki contribs · CheckUser (log)), Thanks! @User98207252129: nothing to worry about. As evident from the Difflink you gave above, the edit has already been reverted by Acroterion. See Wikipedia:Vandalism to learn more about vandalism and how to combat it. Please be aaware that not everything unconstructive is nessesary vandalism. Victor Schmidt (talk) 06:34, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Make sense. Thank you for your response! — Preceding unsigned comment added by User98207252129 (talk • contribs) 07:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How to cite this[edit] I want to cite the management plan for the Hidden Christian Sites in the Nagasaki Region world heritage site. It can be found here however it doesn't open the management plan just the link to open it, how can I cite the file directly, Thank You. Tai123.123 (talk) 06:32, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Tai123.123: Instead of linking the listing, you can use the document URL instead, which appears to be https://whc.unesco.org/document/160504. A cite to this would look something like this:[1]. When citing a PDF as large as this, please do not forget specifying the page number. Victor Schmidt (talk) 06:45, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Tai123.123: I've tweaked Victor Schmidt's example above to include the year of publication and an example page number for you. I agree that a 351 page document, 191Mbyte download is far too large to use as a supporting citation without giving a page number. Because it is likely that such an extensive reference might be used multiple times throughout the document, I've used the REFNAME feature to give it a name so that you can call up the citation two or more times without having to re-enter the details. Thus, five uses of that source across a long article would link to just one entry in the 'References' section, which is much tidier than repeating it five times. Your can use the {{rp}} template to insert the exact page number after each use of the reference. Thus: Hidden Christians passed on their faith from one generation to the next.[1]:?23? Most elements are found along coastal areas and remote islands.[1]:?86? Plans have been prepared to build renewable energy facilities in both the suburbs and on some of the remote islands. This will include solar, tidal and wind energy generation.[1]:?265? I hope you might find that useful. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:52, 20 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ a b c d "Comprehensive Preservation and Management Plan - Hidden Christian Sites in the Nagasaki Region" (pdf). Unesco World Heritage Centre. 2017. p. 350-351. Retrieved 2021-11-20. Need Help[edit] I really need help finding the real names of two esports players in the 2019 MotoGP eSports Championship. There gamertags are XxBoMbeR_45xX and Rllorca. If you ever find their names include them in this page: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2019_MotoGP_eSports_Championship MickeyD's234 (talk) 07:58, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @MickeyD's234 I have moved the page you created to Draft space as it is uncited and probably not notable. I suggest you focus on addressing that, rather than worrying about the real persona of two video gamers. You should submit it through Articles for Creation process when it eventually is. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I keep getting "you need consensus" but when i reply i get no response back.[edit] I keep getting "you need consensus" but when i reply i get no response back. what does it means and why aren't those who post this answering me? I wish to include a solar time-lapse on the "sun" article. can be viewed here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XBmLER08Ryw Daviddayag (talk) 11:03, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I see the issue at Talk:Sun, I think the responder (ScottishFinnishRadish) to your edit request wanted more information about where you want the image placed in the article, what you want as the image caption, why is the image needed? They also wanted to see if you can get input from other users to make sure the image is suitable for inclusion in the featured article Sun (one of wikipedia's highest quality articles). It is better to open a new discussion at Talk:Sun, outline your case for including the image, and see if any regular editors there agree. If so then either they can help you to add the image or you can submit a new edit request. If you have trouble finding someone to respond (perhaps not many people are watching that page), you can try asking at the astronomy wikiproject here: Wikipedia_talk:WikiProject_Astronomy. Polyamorph (talk) 11:26, 20 November 2021 (UTC) It would be more appropriate in the sunspot article, but there are already several good videos there. Also, you have already been told that you should not be adding links to your own YouTube channel.--Shantavira|feed me 11:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Sun - arcs of plasma They're not adding links to their youtube channel, they have uploaded the video to commons. Polyamorph (talk) 12:03, 20 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Hello @Daviddayag, and welcome to the Teahouse. I can see you've taken and already uploaded to Commons some pretty cool images, and I'm sorry you felt you'd hit a brick wall. I can see why, though it's really down to a simple misunderstanding I think. You made a 'protected page edit request' and were asked to get consensus to add it. The reason for that was that the editor who responded to your edit request would not necessarily have been one experienced in the article, so they advised you to seek CONSENSUS. Unfortunately, I don't think you appreciated that you were expected to initiate that discussion yourself, and that's why nothing has happened, thus far. My advice is to start a new section at Talk:Sun, headed something like 'Proposal to add plasma arc'. Then embed the image as I've done here, with the caption you would propose to use (it doesn't have to be the default one you see here). Most importantly, explain your rationale for inserting it. Would it replace an existing image, to which section would it go in, what textual statement would it support. Sign it and then wait for comments. Then, if there is no response after a week or so, you could be justified to WP:BEBOLD and add it yourself. If the majority view of responders is that it would be a bad idea, then you could discuss further, but eventually be prepared to accept that consensus is against you. Having 'been bold' it's possible your addition might be immediately reverted, and then you can start a discussion on the merits of having yet another image in that article. Now, when I started this, I assumed you did not have the 'auto-confirmed' status to edit semi-protected articles, but you do. So, the choice is yours whether to be bold and simply add it, or start that discussion first. I strongly advise the latter course, and I hope my response has given you a path forward and not discouraged you in any way. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 11:48, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Daviddayag You have exhibited a pattern of adding your own telescope photos to articles when perhaps one more image is not useful, and worse, inserting your name and other unnecessary information in the image captions. Please return to the articles and remove your name. David notMD (talk) 12:27, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Agree with this, you shouldn't add your name to image captions - it is already credited in commons where you uploaded the file. Polyamorph (talk) 12:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Good spot. I've now removed the credit from two articles as it's easily findable in the Commons link, and goes against our policies for crediting pictures within articles. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:58, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Reliable sources[edit] Hi, I'm new to all this, and trying to write an article about a social media personality and youtuber. For this type of article, the usual obvious reliable sources like journal articles and books are few and far between. I have tried to use the best quality sources I can find, like published articles. However, sometimes there is no independent secondary source, so I was wondering: Is using the primary source acceptable (e.g. the YouTube video I refer to, or the about page that states the view count of a channel)? If so, should it be cited as a source or linked to in some other way? Twdavies (talk) 13:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Not for notability, and YouTube, as a rule, is a very dodgy source in the first place. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 13:44, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Twdavies Welcome to the Teahouse. Unfortunately, as was hinted at above, our Notability criteria means that we ignore views or follower counts on YouTube as a measure of notability. We focus instead on whether independent media or other reliable sources have written about that person in detail and in depth. Unless those sources are available, it's unlikely that there would be any article accepted about them. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 14:13, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for your reply, I was thinking more in terms of whether a source is reliable as a source of information, rather than whether it is adequate to demonstrate notability. I believe I have some other sources for other parts of the article that show some level of notability, whether or not it is enough is another issue that I will tackle separately if need be. So the views and follower count were just included as pieces of information, rather than as evidence of notability. I have also found, in the link to the reliable sources page above "For example, even extremely low-quality sources, such as social media, may sometimes be used as self-published sources for routine information about the subjects themselves." And I believe this answers my question of whether some of my sources are adequate. If I am mistaken, please let me know. Twdavies (talk) 14:32, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Twdavies No, I think you're right. I'm sorry I didn't quite appreciate what you're asking. We generally trust the person's own SM feeds on trivia, but not on key factual statements about them. Thus, we gave TV presenter, Chris Packham's, birth date based upon one of his Facebook posts, if I remember correctly. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 14:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for your help Twdavies (talk) 14:54, 20 November 2021 (UTC) As the declining AfC reviewer, the user reached out to me on my talk page, here was my response: Youtube/Reddit/Twitter/Twitch - Most social media stuff is going to be considered unreliable (even if it came directly from the person's mouth, unfortunately). With user-generated content, anyone can say they are a big deal or make outlandish claims and give no information to back it up. Additionally, sites like that are often filled with people who are self-promotional and using those promotional sources in an article to try and paint a good PR picture about themselves on Wikipedia. Apple Podcasts/Spotify, etc. - These sources just show that the podcast exists. They don't really tell us anything about the subject. If they do, it is often written by the host themselves, and that brings us back to the user-generated content situation above. At its core, Wikipedia is a bunch of nerds, and so the site still looks at sources like you would use for an essay in school (newspapers, TV, reputable websites, etc.) For example, let's look at Gus' Wikipedia article (Just because Gus has one and not Eddy does not automatically mean that Eddy should have one, BTW. See WP:OSE): there are definitely some similar issues with the sources there, but Gus also has coverage from the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel and the Burnett County Sentinel. (Note that Gus' article doesn't mention his recent controversies, which is talked about on the talk page for the article. Basically, they can't find a reliable source that gives a shit about Youtube Drama. In closing, I want to thank you for wanting to put a good article together. Making articles for YouTubers is super difficult, because the guidelines of who is notable enough are not well understood. For more information on reliable sources, you can look at Wikipedia:Reliable sources or at one of my favorite lists on the site Wikipedia:Reliable sources/Perennial sources, which looks at many well-known sources and whether or not Wikipedia would consider them reliable. Happy editing! Bkissin (talk) 18:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) SUGGESTION(actually): A small idea for improved understanding....[edit] I don't want to spend a bunch of time one this, as I'm virtually certain it will be wasted... HOWEVER, having said that, hopefully it will make it to someone that knows how to use Wikipedia, and is willing and enthusiastic about navigating through the warren of minutia to make it a slightly better tool over time for everyone. I was reading an article here (which I occasionally do), as this seems to be a helpful tool for the most part, AND... I noticed when reading the following excerpt (keeping in mind, this suggestion has ABSOLUTELY ZERO TO DO WITH THE SUBJECT MATTER): QUOTE: "On 19 August 1958, a West Berlin court fined the former xxxxxxxxxx leader 35,000 marks (approximately £3,000, or US$8,300) (equivalent to €81,248 in 2017)," OBSERVATIONS: =======[edit] 1) You'll notice the author of that statement went to some considerable length to try and enhance the understanding of the reader, by taking an otherwise objective monetary value and translating it for the reader into a currency the reader was likely to understand, AND.... adjusting it for inflation so the reader would have some idea as to the relative value/scope of the amount of money that is being referenced. 2) GREAT! The point of any encyclopaedia is to increase the understanding of things for actual human beings. LOVE IT! 3) This method of translating a continually shifting value (virtually no currency's value stays the same over time, ever! Right?) is not unique, it is often used here and in other places that I'm aware of, to help readers understand a relative amount of currency/money/wealth over time. Often I've seen historical values expressed as "a year's worth of wages in today's money" for example. Very useful in producing human understanding by comparison within a contemporary context, and one with which almost every human being on the planet can relate! 4) If you'll notice, the quoted excerpt mentions "2017". Well, that is a couple years old already and time (in so far as I know) is not going to stop, it's going to keep going, and going, and going, and going... AND... that number including what it means/represents is going to continue to slip further, and further, and further away from it's once accurate translation??!?!? It's not going to get MORE ACCURATE, it's going to continually get less accurate, defeating the whole purpose for which it was intended, understanding it's relative value. 5) Since it would not be very efficient to go back and adjust every one of the attempts to create monetary translations that make sense, by manually recalculating them and adjusting them for inflation periodically, and almost impossible to do considering the number of pages and locations where the technique is used over Wikipedia, it occurred to me that there really ought to be a better way. SUGGESTION: =====[edit] (AND,... sorry it took so long to get here, BTW) WHY NOT CREATE SOME SORT OF PROGRAMMABLE, INLINE, WIDGET YOUR WRITER/EDITOR COMMUNITY COULD DEPLOY THAT WOULD CONSTANTLY SHOW THE READER, WHAT THAT ORIGINAL VALUE IS WORTH TODAY, RIGHT NOW... AT THE TIME OF PULLING THE PAGE? Computers are GREAT at repetitious calculation that would put humans to sleep! This looks to me like a perfect use of the kind of things computer excel at, and would benefit the readers and the writers a great deal, I would think. If you can have a little widget that translates the definition of words inline, so... the reader can hover and get the definition of a word, or the relevance of a name, or... whatever the editor thinks could use enhanced understanding, why not have the same kind of widget for historical monetary translation and adjustment? Inputs: Historical Amount(i.e the original number), Historical date being referenced, and Original Currency. Calculation: Depending on the Historical date/era.... reference the correct table(dataset), probably Gold or CPI. "Boil" the Inputs down to an objective, un-adjusted universal value. Read in the language of the user's browser to get the correct currency with which the user is likely to be familiar. Output: Take the objective, un-adjusted universal value and adjust it for inflation. Convert the adjusted value to the currency likely used by the reader based on the language lookup. Present the relevant number in the Hover. (AND... it's obviously going to be more complex than that. The point here is that it is doable with some effort, enthusiasm, and concern for the reading audience.) Thanks for any time and effort expended on behalf of the reading public. DoNotShootAtMe (talk) 15:51, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, welcome to the teahouse. I apologise, initially I thought this was spam, thanks to Theroadislong for letting me know it wasn't. What you are describing sounds very similar to a template that already exists described here: Template:To USD. Similar templates exist for other currencies, e.g. Template:To EUR. Polyamorph (talk) 19:13, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Rootsweb.org/shelby does NOT exist - replaced with https://algenweb.org/shelby[edit] How do I remove the old rootsweb.org/shelby from Wikipedia and add the new and correct link replacement https://algenweb.org/shelby ... they are sometimes listed in outside related links and/or links on Wikipedia. Thank you. Bjseales (talk) 16:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Bjseales: When asking for assistance, it's helpful to mention the name of the Wikipedia article you're referring to. Your three attempts to include yourself in the Thompson High School article have been reverted. "Notable alumni" sections include people who meet Wikipedia's definition of notability and Wikipedia articles exist about them. It is not a place to list everyone who graduated from the school. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 16:40, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Users only edits are to add spam links to their own websites. Theroadislong (talk) 17:55, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-redirect-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a redirect that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A redirect you created, {{{1}}}, which redirected to [[{{{2}}}]], was under discussion, and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a redirect fits our redirect guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) see question above. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:23, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Rows and Columns[edit] Hey guys! How do you edit rows and columns to Wikitables in the source editor? I screwed up trying to do this and had to use the visual editor. Thanks! BubbaDaAmogus (talk) 18:28, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @BubbaDaAmogus Tables are fiendishly hard. Help:Introduction to tables with Wiki Markup/1 is a good place to start. Use your sandbox and play FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 18:31, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1056263782" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 20 November 2021, at 19:13 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH AlanM1, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 hi 2 Capital punishment in the Bible 3 How to give warnings with Twinkle tags 4 The Future of Wikipedia 5 Wikitampering: One chart, 52 weeks 6 Draft:Shyam Sunder Jyani 7 How to create click to drop down segments of an article? 8 What to do about unsourced, promotional, biographical articles? 9 Notability References 10 Ginger? 11 Can I start my own newsletter? 12 Tips on creating a user page 13 Wiki Did You Know 14 I do not understand why a New York Times reference has been flagged as an unreliable source. Help? 15 How is everyones day 16 Vandalism on page Kanchi Kamakoti Peetham by anonymous user ip 17 How to move articles from sandbox to the main space 18 Editing the content of a page 19 Declined Article due to notability 20 I would like to add people on Merseyside people on that Wikipedia page need to be guided through it? 21 Edição 22 List of countries 23 Edit to Atom (software) 24 David Leigh Clark 25 Dr. Vin Gupta 26 Permission for a photo 27 Need help to re-edit page to remove a content problem panel. 28 Sumner bio 29 Edit reversion 30 "spamming" 31 How many edits? 32 Citation help needed 33 Revision history 34 Visual editor creates bugs in refs 35 Is this allowed or not 36 User Rights 37 Someone deleted my comments on a talk page 38 Contributions to Signature 39 If a user requests that something is added on a talk page and I (or someone else) has done it, can the request be deleted? Is not, what should be done? 40 Repeated requests for logins 41 Adding well-referenced negative facts 42 Copyright issue 43 Why is my Talk Page post in italics? 44 Can someone tell me how my draft is looking please? 45 Clarification on dispute resolution 45.1 More on dispute question 46 New page 47 Adminstats 48 What to do if wording does not reflect cited source? 49 Would you like to review my draft on "Autism in China"? 50 Stub pages 51 7M Pages 52 Archived URLs 53 Watchlists of other editors 54 PLEASE ACCEPT MY ARTICLE CREATION I WANT TO MAKE ARTICLE WHO POLITICIAN AND CELEBRATIS PERSON 55 How do I know if a page is full? 56 Which tag to use for page protect? 57 DS Alert regarding Arab–Israeli conflict 58 Logo Update Not Appearing in Article 59 Hey, I need help... 60 How to cite this 61 Need Help 62 I keep getting "you need consensus" but when i reply i get no response back. 63 Reliable sources 64 SUGGESTION(actually): A small idea for improved understanding.... 64.1 ======= 64.2 ===== 65 Rootsweb.org/shelby does NOT exist - replaced with https://algenweb.org/shelby 66 Autoconfirmed user 67 Template:Uw-create-kept 68 Template:Uw-redirect-kept 69 Rows and Columns Most recent archives 1112, 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131 hi[edit] hi,Anyone? Athena-en (talk) 07:16, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Athena-en: Please don't remove the COI template from Xian Jun Loh without a discussion. And please see WP:COI. TimTempleton (talk) (cont) 07:21, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @Timtempleton:?received.07:52, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Capital punishment in the Bible[edit] i am a professor of Hebrew Bible/ Old Testament at Duke. how can i go about editing this page, correcting many of the deficiencies noted? marc brettler — Preceding unsigned comment added by 152.3.43.54 (talk) 16:02, 16 November 2021 (UTC) You may make an edit request(click for instructions) detailing changes you feel are needed, on the article talk page, Talk:Capital punishment in the Bible. 331dot (talk) 16:05, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Alternatively, you could create an account (there is no need to use your real name) and when it is autoconfirmed you'll be able to edit the article directly. It is protected from direct access by IP-only accounts because it suffers from so much vandalism. Whether you edit directly or via an edit request, please be sure to supply reliable sources for any change. However expert you are, we do not allow original research in Wikipedia. Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:14, 16 November 2021 (UTC) As an fyi, here's what "autoconfirmed" means if that didn't mean much to you: Autoconfirmed users. -- asilvering (talk) 03:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) The artice is currently under protection (WP:SEMI) but that expires in a couple of days. WP:TUTORIAL and WP:EXPERT can be of help to you. Also: PLEASE improve that article. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 16:53, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Click on Talk (upper left) to see if some of what you have in mind has been subject of past or current debate. David notMD (talk) 17:06, 16 November 2021 (UTC) How to give warnings with Twinkle tags[edit] I asked this question to the editor, who gave me welcome message, but he is not answering it. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_talk:HiLo48#Tag_Twinkle --ZebraaaLounge (talk) 18:13, 16 November 2021 (UTC) ZebraaaLounge (talk) 18:13, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @ZebraaaLounge: Those are given with the tool called Twinkle, however I recommend you don't use it until you've gained a bit more experience and you resolve the edit war you are currently engaged in. ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 18:15, 16 November 2021 (UTC) @ZebraaaLounge: it is absolutely unacceptable for you to falsify another user's signature, as you did in this edit. I don't know what you were trying to do, but please do not ever do that again. CodeTalker (talk) 19:38, 16 November 2021 (UTC) CodeTalker, Where did I falsify their signature. Wikipedia was having lots of page loading, problem, and server error. I wrote their names instead of pinging them. I was replying to one user mentioning another user's name. And in the whole edit, only my signature has links to my user page, talkpage. They are obviously watching their last edits, and that's why I did not ping them at that time.ZebraaaLounge (talk) 02:17, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I checked again and saw I ended the comment with my signature only. And page history will show who made what edit. ZebraaaLounge (talk) 02:31, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @ZebraaaLounge: I think you messed up with that edit. If you look what happened in the diff, not only did you add a comment of your own, correctly signed, but you also changed someone else's signature from a comment 4 paragraphs higher so that it read [[User:NarSakSasLee|Echo1Charlie]] instead of [[User:NarSakSasLee|NarSakSasLee]]. This would have presented the text Echo1Charlie (while linking to NarSakSasLee, who actually wrote the paragraph so signed). You can see how this would create a very bad impression, as it looks as though you are trying to put NarSakSasLee's words in Echo1Charlie's mouth. Best avoided! Elemimele (talk) 12:00, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Elemimele: @CodeTalker: I understand what happened now. Their names NarSakSasLee are uncommon words, jumbled letters, so not easy to spell. I was copy-pasting their names to write my own comment. Instead I copy-pasted another's name in other's signature. Their signature has spelling. Bbb23 name is easy to remember. ZebraaaLounge (talk) 07:06, 18 November 2021 (UTC) The Future of Wikipedia[edit] Firstly, thank you for the invitation. Due to Wikipedia relying solely on Donations - would it be a possibility that Wikipedia would ever close? I have donated and will donate to WikiMedia, but I think a fundraising option would be great, to advertise Wikipedia's need for donations internationally in person, in the streets. Just a couple of thoughts, Best Regards, StrawberryFieldsChorley StrawberryFieldsChorley (talk) 23:57, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for your donations. Wikipedia needs donations, but I haven't heard that it's particularly pressed for money. So if you have more and are feeling magnanimous, consider one of the various alternatives. (Médecins Sans Frontières seems good.) -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @StrawberryFieldsChorley As Hoary says, 'thank you'. The Wikimedia Foundation actually raises a lot more money than is required simply to meet technical support and server costs, not to mention the 12GW/h of electricity needed to meet the demands of being one of the top most-visited websites in the world. Very large amounts of money are spent in educational and outreach work, especially in the less developed parts of the world where education and access to information is so needed. So, to answer your question as to whether any of the multiple language versions of Wikipedia would ever close, on a purely funding basis, I think the answer is "no". Though, were it ever to spend, year on year, more than it brings in annually, then it could find itself having to 'draw its horns in'. The people who have actually written the content in the 6.2million+ articles on English Wikipedia are all volunteers - just as they are in the myriad of other language projects. So rest assured that your donations never end up in the pockets of us editors. We do it all for the enjoyment and the satisfaction. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:34, 17 November 2021 (UTC) All that said, though, of course Wikipedia will end one day, as will everything humans have created. "Ever" is a very long time. DS (talk) 02:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Can't disagree with that one iota! Nick Moyes (talk) 21:40, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes is right. Given the fact that Wikipedia is the 13th most visited site in the world, and the largest encyclopedia in the history of the world by more than nearly triple the amount that the second largest has, the likelihood of Wikipedia or any other language variants closing is not very great. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 14:43, 17 November 2021 (UTC) "Too big to fail" is not a waterproof argument. Megaupload had fifty million daily users when it was shut down (and Wikipedia is more illegal in some countries than Megaupload was in the US). TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 09:40, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi @StrawberryFieldsChorley: - Wikipedia (specifically, the Wikimedia Foundation) publishes their financial details here. The gist of it is that: They currently get more from donations and grants than they spend, They have around $170 million in cash in their bank account(s), They spend around $2.5 million a year to keep the website running - the rest is for employees, projects, outreach, scholarships, etc. So in case donations suddenly stop entirely, I’m fairly sure they’d be able to cut off a lot of expenses and be able to make do - maybe for 10 years. Of course, 95% of internet users and big tech companies would prefer to not have Wikipedia suddenly disappear, so I’m sure something will get figured out. Juxlos (talk) 10:21, 19 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add that maybe non-English Wikipedia sites may close at some point earlier than the English Wikipedia, due to those sites not being as popular as the English Wikipedia, and having less pages, and albeit less contributors, but let's not focus on that, XD. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:38, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Wikitampering: One chart, 52 weeks[edit] There may be other Wikipedia pages with this peculiar little bit of tampering but this is the first one I've found. Every one of the links at the bottom of the page listing the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play number ones of 2005 – https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Billboard_Hot_Dance_Club_Play_number_ones_of_2005 – goes to the Billboard chart for March 28, 2020. I'm afraid to look at the pages for 2004 and 2006! Thomps2020 (talk) 01:53, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: It looks like what used to be unique URLs for those dates are now just redirecting to Billboard's chart for March 2020. I think this is something that changed on Billboard's website, not on-wiki vandalism. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 01:59, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020 I'll echo what Claudine said - Doesn't look like any malicious intent, and the page history doesn't show any vandalism :). I'm updating that article's references right now with archive links, so hopefully nobody else will get confused! Either way, good eye catching that. ThadeusOfNazerethTalk to Me! 02:41, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you, Thadeus, for going to all that trouble. If someone from Billboard really did redirect all the links, why use a chart from March of 2020? Why not have the links go to the current week's chart? Not being in the "link redirecting" business, I have no idea. Thomps2020 (talk) 05:10, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Well, I just checked the links on the page of Hot Dance Club Play number-one singles of 1992.....and 1993.....and 1994.....and 1995 – and every link goes to that same chart of March 28, 2020. Yeah, Diana Ross' "Love Hangover 2020" was number one. We know! We know! Who redirected the links – and why? Is there any way to find out? Thomps2020 (talk) 05:37, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: You would probably have to ask Billboard. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:49, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: Chipping in here, it's because as it stands that chart from March 2020 is the most recent one (the Dance Club Play chart has been suspended since that date due to COVID). So they probably changed all the links and the no-longer-working link format redirects to the latest chart, which in this case is 18 months old. Hope that makes sense..... -- ChrisTheDude (talk) 12:31, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Thomps2020: Organizations and companies often rework their websites for a variety of reasons, and older content gets overwritten by more recent stuff or moved to some new url address as part of that process; so, when you click on the old link, you end up getting redirected to some other page. Sometimes you can find archived versions of the old webpages via sites like the Wayback Machine and this is what ThadeusOfNazereth has gone and done; so, everything should be fine now. You can do the same as well the next time you come across a similar problem if you want, or you can use templates {{Citations broken}} or {{Dead link}} to let others know about the problem. -- Marchjuly (talk) 06:45, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Shyam Sunder Jyani[edit] FYI?– Removed leading spaces – ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) Hello there, I am new with Wikipedia community. When I made first edit on a Wikipedia article, I was on cloud nine. After that, I made few other minor changes. I submitted an article to publish. The page url is https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Shyam_Sunder_Jyani . Unfortunately, it has not been accepted and declined. The person whom I wrote article has a significant coverage on print media, online media and with few Govt. official websites. Could you guide me how should I provide accurate and reliable information so that if it get approved if it meets with wikipedia guidelines? I also want to learn best practices of wikipedia. Best, Jakhar Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:52, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: The links in the decline message tell you what you need to do to show that the subject of this article is notable – provide reliable, independent, secondary sources, and cite them using Wikipedia's referencing methods. Verifiability tells you why it's important to add sources to articles and how you can identify reliable sources. Your first source, a faculty profile from the professor's college, would probably be considered a self-published source, and besides, it doesn't say why he is notable. I am not certain whether India Today would be considered reliable (see discussion at § India Today or IndiaToday.com) but even if it is, you would need more than one good source. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) FYI?– Fixed indentation per WP:THREAD – ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) Thank you ClaudineChionh so much for your prompt response and teaching me about reliable sources. Yes, there are few reliable sources are available. Below are the few sources where about him and his initiative is covered in this year. Could you help me out if these are the reliable source? https://www.unccd.int/actionsland-life-programme/land-life-award-2021-healthy-land-healthy-livesBe https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/rajasthan-women-vow-to-nurture-green-family/article34862254.ece https://www.dw.com/en/familial-forestry-in-india-caring-for-trees-like-theyre-family/a-59215321 https://www.unccd.int/news-events/2021-land-life-award-winner-familial-forestry https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CgYwtwGedxg Thank you and I patiently waiting for your further guidance. Jakhar Singh — Preceding unsigned comment added by Jakhar Singh (talk • contribs) 09:35, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Please keep replies threaded by indenting your reply with a colon at the start, and sign your reply adding four tildes (~~~~) at the end. You can enable the Discussion Tools beta feature to indent and sign your replies automatically on talk pages – look for this in Preferences. As to your sources: WP:RSP is a good place to start looking for discussions and consensus on the reliability of many sources. The Hindu: generally yes Deutsche Welle (DW): It's not in the table but archived discussions suggest yes United Nations agencies: It depends on the topic and the agency (see discussion at § Is the United Nations a Reliable Source?) – specific sources should be discussed on the article/draft talk page. YouTube: usually no — Preceding unsigned comment added by ClaudineChionh (talk • contribs) 10:12, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you ClaudineChionh for teaching me. I will look for the sources you suggested. For a new article, Would it be good if just brief about the object in few lines (e.g. 3-5 lines) so it can be approved easily and then subsequent edits can be made? The article which I am writing, he is a Govt. college Professor and apart from his teaching job, he works for environment and society so could I use the phrases like environmentalist and social worker? Could you teach me what needs to keep in mind while writing a first article for best practices? Best Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:38, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Every fact or descriptive phrase you use must be supported by reliable sources. You can read about the steps to create an article, though as I am not an article reviewer, I am not the best person to ask for advice on this process. You are strongly advised to read your first article as well, and it's also a very good idea to spend some time on other tasks here before creating a new article, which is one of the more difficult tasks in Wikipedia. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Everyone has a slightly different style of articles and word choices - and in this case, one set of phrases you can use is "Shyam Sunder Jyani is an Indian environmentalist and academician". Looking at a glance from google news, I would say Mr. Jyani here does pass Wikipedia's notability guidelines - I hope you don't mind if I stir the article draft up a bit. Juxlos (talk) 10:31, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Minor point: an academician is a member of an academy; it can be used about an academic in general, but academic is a much more common term for a person who works as a professor, lecturer, or researcher at a university. --bonadea contributions talk 10:50, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Fair enough. Regardless, article has been extended with sources ranging from 2009 to 2021 - fairly sure it's good to go, if a bit stubby. Regardless I'm not familiar with the reviewer side of AfC so I'd let other editors do it. Juxlos (talk) 11:01, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Juxlos, Thank you so much for drafting the article of Shyam Sunder Jyani. As I am new with wikipedia hence in the learning phase so I started this Teahouse help talk with ClaudineChionh then you came in and did a great job. The voluntary continuation of wikipedians to humanity is really commendable. I really admire your voluntary services. Bless you. I will keep enhance my learning and give my best to this wikipedia community. P.S. Juxlos, there are minor phrases or grammer tweaks that need to be corrected in the article. I think I am now able to do this... Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:28, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How to create click to drop down segments of an article?[edit] I would like to know how to create one of those click-to-drop-down aspects of an article? I would like to make this page (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sharksploitation) more accessible. People can choose to view the films by release order or alphabetical order or alphabetical for the first film with it's sequels below it. As it is now I need to use Ctrl-f to find what I am looking for Simdude1990 (talk) 16:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Do you mean a sortable table? Help:Table has a lot of information about how to create and format tables. Or do you mean "collapsed" content, where you can hide or show part of the content on a page? That's usually not recommended for articles – there is some information about it here. --bonadea contributions talk 16:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990: – I didn't manage to ping you the first time... --bonadea contributions talk 16:32, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I mean the collapsed segments. I am thinking something like the following Films in Alphabetical order (collapsed) Films in Alphabetical and Sequel order (collapsed) Films by Genre/type (collapsed) Films in release order (standard article, non-collapsible) - Although I will probably invert the list and separate it by year (or group of years eg 1980-1985, 2000's etc.)--Simdude1990 (talk) 16:44, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990: Welcome to the Teahouse. Like Bonadea said, collapsible content generally shouldn't be collapsed per the Manual of Style. Perhaps sortable tables would work better for you? —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 19:55, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990 Firstly, there genuinely isn't enough content in that page to warrant any collapsing/hiding; I can't imagine why on earth you'd think there is? I do, however, agree with @Tenryuu, and feel that a sortable table would allow users to sort these films by year or by title, or by anything else you felt inclined to add. But that would only merit being collapsible were there some other content worthy of bringing to the fore, but I don't see any on this topic. (An example of a very lengthy article that I created which can have its one table hidden to make the whole page more viewable can be found here). Secondly, I really fail to understand why this page exists under that title. Surely it would be better as a List article (e.g. List of sharksploitation films). Nick Moyes (talk) 01:01, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for your input, a sortable table seems like the way to go, I didn't know they existed. I intend on including a lot of other films that are missing from the list, when they are included I'm sure it will be quite large. I may change it to a list page, however, myself or others may add other information that would make it no longer just a list. Some of the films to add don't have Wikipedia pages, they all have IMDB pages or foreign wikis see here for an example. Is it ok to link to those from the movie title? or would it be better to have this (IMDB) next to the corresponding film? or no link except for in the references?--Simdude1990 (talk) 10:55, 18 November 2021 (UTC) List articles on Wikipedia should contain items that still abide by Wikipedia's content policies, particularly verifiablilty and notability. Generally that means that each film should have its own English Wikipedia article (I specify English because other languages tend to have less strict content policies and guidelines); IMDb and foreign wikis aren't acceptable as they are for the most part user-generated, which trashes verifiability. Lists aren't expected to be exhaustive. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 17:07, 18 November 2021 (UTC) "IMDb and foreign wikis aren't acceptable as they are for the most part user-generated" Literally so is this English version of Wikipedia..... I can always build the appropriate pages later and link them in properly, just in the interim, a link so someone can look into the film beyond the list. I will only add films that I have seen, at least then I won't add anything that does not exist--Simdude1990 (talk) 10:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Literally so is this English version of Wikipedia. That is correct, which is why editors are not allowed to cite Wikipedia itself. There's no deadline to have any article "finished", so I'd focus on establishing films' notability with high-quality reliable sources and creating articles for those before adding them onto the list. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 16:30, 19 November 2021 (UTC) What to do about unsourced, promotional, biographical articles?[edit] Hi, I recently came across the article Fayez Barakat while browsing recent changes. The article has mostly been edited by users that only write about Fayez Barakat, has no citations, and the two references with ISBNs seem to be published by a company that has only published books on Fayez Barakat. It contains plenty of unsourced direct quotes, and passages such as: "He is best known as one of the world's most important collectors and dealers of ancient art"; "At the age of 14 Barakat was offered a Fulbright Scholarship to study medicine in the United States on account of his remarkable aptitude for absorbing and understanding information" [seems extremely unlikely]; "Barakat remarks that 'our mind cannot penetrate the mystery of the Universe. We know that the number of galaxies is endless, and we try to listen with the ears of our soul the music they make moving across the infinite skies'. He looks at the universe and at the multitude of galaxies and constellations with a subliminal and telepathic telescope, seeing those eternal lights moving across the infinite through the intuitive eye of his heart. He tries to evade the boundaries of this galaxy through the intuitive dimension, breaking through the limits of space and time, and see the entirety of the infinite and of the eternal. In doing so, he fuses himself into the quantum field, into the energy moving the universe on a sub-atomic and global level. The energy the artist impresses on the canvas is the one that permeates his soul, intellect, senses and instincts, and merges into the energy which animates and moves the universe."; and so on. What do I do about this? It seems to me that the entire article should be deleted for a complete lack of sources or anything establishing notability. But how do I proceed to do this? Do I just start a proposal for deletion? Should I post on the Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons/Noticeboard to get someone more experienced to look it over, or is there something else that would be the best course of action? Thanks in advance for any help! Knuthove (talk) 20:19, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Knuthove (talk) I looked at Fayez Barakat and see it is now tagged as having multiple issues. In addition, the talk page has a new Conflict of Interest tag. Thank you for bringing this to the attention of other editors. Karenthewriter (talk) 22:39, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Knuthove, Never be afraid to remove unverified info, especially puffery of this kind. - hako9 (talk) 22:44, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Knuthove Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. I see that a number of editors have now tagged the article with their concerns, and I have personally removed swathes of uncited trivia and promotional text, and warned the IP editor about declaring a conflict of interest Assuming you are motivated to take action yourself, you could look for online sources yourself to decide whether or not this person meets our Notability Criteria for living people. The page called WP:BEFORE outlines the steps one should take prior to putting an article forward for deletion. I note there are various sources listed, though the one I did search out (see here) is clearly a self-published gallery catalogue. Maybe others are too, though some of the claims in the article (if true) do suggest he might well be notable. So some further investigation would be helpful, and then perhaps a post at WP:BLP/N could be merited if its still not clear. I hope this helps, and thanks for raising your question here. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:47, 17 November 2021 (UTC) It has now been stripped down to a mere stub, citing three sources. This may look promising, until one realizes that all three are only interviews. (I'm surprised that WP:RS doesn't mention interviews; all that I can find in a hurry is Wikipedia:Interviews, which is merely a somewhat waffly essay.) -- Hoary (talk) 23:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I looked for Fayez Barakat on Google and found his Wikipedia article and numerous Fayez Barakat generated cites. Then I went to newspapers.com and found one article (https://www.newspapers.com/image/148931789/?terms=%22Fayez%20Barakat%22&match=1) about the art dealer allegedly buying stolen items. He does not seem to have much media coverage. Karenthewriter (talk) 01:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you all for your comments and editing! I see that the article now is just about what I would have made it if I had removed the unsourced parts myself rather than ask about it here. The reason I didn't do that was because I thought the article might simply be deleted instead. Reading your comments, it seems to me that the question is whether the interviews now listed as sources are enough to establish notability, and if any other sources can be found. I am skeptical that these interviews are independent enough, and seeing how hard finding other sources appears to be, it doesn't look good. I'll go through the steps in WP:BEFORE and see about starting my first AfD discussion eventually. Knuthove (talk) 14:14, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Interviews themselves are never considered independent, although some published interviews can contain a blurb or other critical commentary that is itself independent. This looks like a decent source. Possibly the Barakat gallery might be more notable than its owner. If the article is kept, there are probably sources to be found about the "looted art" angle (for instance, see here is a blog post about a procedure that Iran won against the gallery, blog post but by a law professor so probably usable for the claim that a trial was held) - my layman understanding after a cursory search is that the gallery makes a decent try to avoid buying art registered as stolen, but will still buy stuff "found" by amateurs which surely encourages dubious collection methods. TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 09:58, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Notability References[edit] Where and how do I enter notability references in my new Wikipedia article? CorpTool (talk) 22:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) CorpTool (talk) 22:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @CorpTool Welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for declaring your COI with regard this article. You need to find in-depth sources that are independent of the subject and which are not part of the insider news community (ecosystem) that this company works in. Use only the factual statements in those sources as the basis of the article. Right now, it's seems pretty obvious you are probably being paid to promote this article on Wikipedia because the marketing speak oozes out of every single sentence. See WP:PAID to explicitly declare who is paying you. To be frank, it's wholly unacceptable as an encyclopaedia article right now. So, cut out 9/10ths of the article's current content and present facts that establish Notability based purely upon just those key sources. Read WP:NCORP to learn more. If you feel you've already included the best sources, just link to the top three in any reply you make here and we'll take a quick look at them. I for one am not prepared to wade through dozens of probable press releases and trade magazine links to attempt to ascertain notability. I hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 23:05, 17 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Hello, CorpTool. I'm afraid that your question is like "Where and how do I build foundations for the house I have just put up?" If you write a single statement without having a reliable source wholly independent of the subject for the information in that statement, you are probably wasting your time (and other people's). In respect of Draft:Confiant Inc. I would say on a quick scan that at least three quarters of the draft should be removed, as it is pure marketing copy. Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. When you have found these independent sources, you then need to forget basically everything you know about Confiant, and write exclusively from what those independent sources say (and don't forget to include any substantial criticisms they have). An even better use of your time would be to put this project aside for at least six months while you "learn the trade" of editing Wikipedia by working on improving some of our six million articles unrelated to your COI. --ColinFine (talk) 23:07, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Also, Wikipedia:No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability is a good essay on some of the related problems here. --Jayron32 13:37, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the input. CorpTool (talk) 16:53, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Ginger?[edit] Hi, on the current Ginger wiki page, it really doesn't have any clear distinct info on the actual variety of ginger out there [1] or the positive effects reported by systematic reviews. Is that meant to be normal and is it acceptable to add them in including systematic reviews that explains the positive found effects? From sources like https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7019938/? TheUntamedBig (talk) 02:04, 18 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.producebluebook.com/know-your-commodity/ginger-root/ @TheUntamedBig: Welcome to the Teahouse! The best place for this question is the talk page of the relevant article, which in this case is Talk:Ginger. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 02:30, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the tip. But I was also hoping you can answer a more general question in that is it okay to add in info about research from systematic review sources like https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7019938/ to Wikipedia articles? Are they solid enough sources? TheUntamedBig (talk) 02:41, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Reliable sources § Academic consensus does say that Review articles, especially those printed in academic review journals that survey the literature, can help clarify academic consensus, and this would include systematic reviews. But I think the reliability of the specific journal and researchers would also be important in determining whether a specific sources is appropriate. I don't have the expertise to say whether the article you linked or the journal Nutrients is reliable – this is something that would be best taken up on the article talk page or one of the WikiProjects listed at the top of the talk page. As for the "Product Blue Book" source, that looks like an industry/commercial website, which may be less reliable. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 03:04, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh thanks for the detailed explanation. Appreciate it and I think that answers my question :).TheUntamedBig (talk) 03:29, 18 November 2021 (UTC) TheUntamedBig The article does have a Research section that touches on putative health benefits. I have not checked the references to see if they meet the WP:MEDRS criteria of being reviews, systematic reviews or meta-analyses. You might also look at the other "G" dietary supplements Ginseng, Garlic and Ginkgo biloba to see how medicinal and traditional uses are described. David notMD (talk) 09:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Can I start my own newsletter?[edit] I was just wondering, is it possible for me to create my own Wikipedia newsletter? (It sounds like a fun project reporting what's going on in Wikipedia, but also difficult. And, I don't know if I even can.) WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 02:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) WaterflameIsAwesome, this is an encyclopedia. Fun is incidental. I suggest that you make a thousand or so substantial improvements to existing article -- improvements in the judgment of other editors, who build on your edits rather than reverting them. Then you can decide whether or not you want to create a newsletter. And if you still do, then after those thousand improvements you'll know what you're writing about. -- Hoary (talk) 02:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Ok, good idea. I just thought it would be something else to make Wikipedia worth my while. Because I'm not gonna sit around Wikipedia just editing articles all day. I just thought it would be a good break from doing my duty, but I'll try and get 1,000,000 edits before I start a newsletter. :/ WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 02:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Nobody expects you to edit articles all day. Your fellow-editors hope that the edits that you do make are improvements. (If one in fifty is mistaken, OK. If a substantial percentage are mistaken, not OK.) To take a break from improving articles, there are many possibilities, many of them away from your computer (or phone). -- Hoary (talk) 02:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I meant like other things on Wikipedia, not including away from WP. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 02:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) WaterflameIsAwesome, I think it's good to approach Wikipedia as a reader, and then, while you're reading, to encounter some kind of deficiency or irritation or other kind of problem -- and then not to rush in but to think about it: "Do I really know what's going on here? Am I sure that what I have in mind is an improvement?" When you are pretty confident that you can answer "yes and yes", improve it, carefully. This may take rather more time than you want to spend on it, but when it's done you'll be more confident of what you're doing. Look for opportunities to make similar improvements elsewhere. Soon you'll be pretty good at this, and fast, too. That will bring a feeling of satisfaction. (Just one thing: Avoid looking for "grammar mistakes". A certain kind of editor cites something written in an underinformed, silly book about grammar -- there are plenty of these, many of them from respected publishers -- and wastes lots of time inflicting some so-called "grammar rule" on perfectly good prose.) -- Hoary (talk) 07:34, 18 November 2021 (UTC) To @Hoary: WP:LIGHTENUP. To @WaterflameIsAwesome: check out Wikipedia:Department of Fun. ––FormalDude talk 02:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Bah, Hoary (talk) 05:15, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Getting to 1,000,000 edits is a reach. According to Wikipedia:List of Wikipedians by number of edits, only 13 people have surpassed that milestone. David notMD (talk) 09:45, 18 November 2021 (UTC) To WaterflameIsAwesome: if you're planning to write your own Wikipedia newsletter, and send it out to a mailing list that you maintain yourself, that's fine, I doubt anyone here can stop you. If you're planning to publish it using Wikipedia itself, you may encounter difficulties. Wikipedia has its own monthly newsletter, The Signpost, which used to have interesting articles about the running of Wikipedia, but has become anodyne since the Wikimedia Foundation starting influencing its contents. If your plan is to compete with The Signpost, I wish you success; but you're going to need some good high-level contacts to supply your information. Maproom (talk) 12:30, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I wasn't necessarily thinking about trying to compete with The Signpost. In fact, The Signpost is the whole reason I'm asking this question, lol (I hadn't heard of a newsletter until I discovered it). It wouldn't really have any other purpose than just discussing Wikipedia, and maybe a short "how-to" section or something like that. I might just merge multiple Wikipedia newspapers/newsletters into one, stating each story in my own words, with maybe some minor help from others. Just a fun project that I could work on for some free time on Wikipedia. For now, I think I might settle for putting some stories on my user page, as a starter. IF that's doable, of course. ;) WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 23:02, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Oh yeah, also @David notMD, I didn't literally mean one million edits. Also, am I the only one here who has a sense of sarcasm? WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 23:04, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Tips on creating a user page[edit] I need help on what I should add to my user page. I've created it, but I'm not sure what to do with it. Here it is: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:WaterflameIsAwesome WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) oh shoot I forgot my signature provides a link XD WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:23, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @WaterflameIsAwesome: you could add what you first edit was. You could add userboxes based off your interests; something maybe like sports. You can also add userboxes that say how many edits you have made etc. you can also look at my user page for an example and my userboxes that you might want to use. Kaleeb18 (talk) 03:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Oh ok thanks! I'll check it out. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:49, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Did You Know[edit] Can anyone here please tell me how I can find yesterday's DID YOU KNOW (17th Nov, 2021). I had seen about someone breastfeeding in the nursing room, in front of some males, and she was also a politician. Actually that is not the case, I want to find yesterday DID YOU KNOW. I cannot find it in the page history?? Cannot understand why. Please assist me in the following matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:02, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Here's the DYK archive for the current month, with links and search for the whole archive. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 05:10, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionhThanks a lot for helping me again. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:16, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh Yeah it was Susan Catania. I wanted to read about her. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:19, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Just so you know - the reason you couldn't find it in the history of the front page is that the Did You Know section is a template, rather than an article. So you'd have to check the history of the template rather than of the front page itself. DS (talk) 19:28, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I do not understand why a New York Times reference has been flagged as an unreliable source. Help?[edit]  Courtesy link: Martha Nothmann The source is: "A Nazi Legacy Haunts a Museum’s New Galleries", url https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/11/arts/design/kunsthaus-zurich-buhrle-collection.html The message I received was: "Ways to improve Martha Nothmann Hello, Eli185, Thank you for creating Martha Nothmann. I have tagged the page as having some issues to fix, as a part of our page curation process and note that: Many of the references are unreliable, such as the one from The New York Times The tags can be removed by you or another editor once the issues they mention are addressed. If you have questions, leave a comment here and begin it with @Qwerfjkl:. Remember to sign your reply with Eli185 (talk) 07:37, 18 November 2021 (UTC). For broader editing help, please visit the Teahouse. Delivered via the Page Curation tool, on behalf of the reviewer. Qwerfjkltalk 07:23, 18 November 2021 (UTC)" What am I supposed to do if a reviewer does not like the content of a NYT article about Nazi art looting in a Wikipedia article about a Jewish art collector? Eli185 (talk) 07:37, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Eli185, Qwerfjkl actually specified the NYT in their comment in your talk page. You responded by politely asking what was wrong with it. That was a good response. Now wait for the answer. (If no answer comes in a couple of days, then you'd be welcome to bring up the matter elsewhere.) -- Hoary (talk) 08:51, 18 November 2021 (UTC) How is everyones day[edit]  Dsmi3939 (talk) 08:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Uh I think this is not the right place to say this. The Teahouse is to ask questions about Wikipedia, not ask how everyone's day is. But, to reply to your message, I am fine. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:52, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism on page Kanchi Kamakoti Peetham by anonymous user ip[edit] An anonymous user 117.223.250.19 has deleted entire intro and writes propaganda. Pls help. Where should I report?Kannadiga kanmani Kannadiga kanmani (talk) 09:48, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I see only one edit (a large deletion) by that IP address, which you reverted. I suggest you put the article on your Watch list, but do not bother to warn or ask for a block on the IP unless this is repeated. David notMD (talk) 09:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Actually, this has gotten worse. The IP may have edited as 117.153.68.63, 117.249.143.61, 117.251.229.138 and 117.223.266.69. Peopel with disputes should discuss in Talk page of article. David notMD (talk) 01:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) How to move articles from sandbox to the main space[edit] kindly help me to move an article from my sandbox to the main space. User:Ngangaesther/sandbox Ngangaesther (talk) 10:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Please, see Wikipedia:So_you_made_a_userspace_draft#Ready!. Ruslik_Zero 12:52, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Editing the content of a page[edit] Good day, As the communication team of Societe Generale de Banque au Liban, we have noticed some wrong information in the presentation of our bank on Wikipedia. Can you kindly help us through the best procedure to amend the content without violating the page? i.e. an "allegation section" contains erupted information that we are seeking to remove. As for the introduction, we would like to bring some modifications reflecting the current description of our bank. Awaiting your kind feedback in order to bring the required amendments as soon as possible. Best regards, Christelle Feghaly Head of Press & Media Relations Cfeghaly (talk) 11:21, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Cfeghaly. Before you or anyone of your fellow team members try to edit the article about your bank, I strongly suggest you and they take the time to carefully read through Wikipedia:Conflict of interest, Wikipedia:Paid-contribution disclosure and Wikipedia:Plain and simple conflict of interest guide because they most certainly would apply to you or anyone else connected to the bank based upon what you posted above. Then, you probably should also take a close look at Wikipedia:Ownership of content because it's important for you and your fellow team members to understand that your bank doesn't not have any type of editorial control over what's written about it on Wikipedia. This doesn't mean that anyone can simple write whatever they want (good or bad) about the bank on Wikipedia, but it does mean that all content about the bank is going to be assessed in accordance with relevant Wikipedia policies and guidelines and may be considered acceptable even if it's not something the bank likes. -- Marchjuly (talk) 12:29, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Strong warnings have been placed on your Talk page about declaring paid situation and ceasing to edit the article directly. Same applies to User:Elite Moussa. David notMD (talk) 12:47, 18 November 2021 (UTC) That said, I did look at the article and to be frank, all I see is mention of an uncited allegation made by an unspecified "local newspaper", with two reasonable-looking sources denying that the allegation was incorrect. It makes me feel that the entire two sentence allegation section is quite possibly not appropriate in the article, and was done for POV purposes, and that it should be removed until better sources are found. The Press & Media Relations Team in the form of @Cfeghaly is advised to make an WP:EDITREQUEST on the talk page, detailed explicitly what changes they would seek other editors make for them. They can then investigate what, if any Reliable Sources have been published and make the changes accordingly. Declaring their Conflict of Interest in that edit and also on their Userpage would be important things to do, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 14:05, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Declined Article due to notability[edit] How do I make my subject notable, if i have added reliable sources? Jasminbrown1202 (talk) 14:40, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Jasminbrown1202 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. I assume this refers to Draft:Tonesa "FirstladyofBMF" Welch. You cannot make the subject notable, but you can demonstrate their notability with independent reliable sources with significant coverage of the person. Much of the draft is unsourced(see WP:REFB for assistance with citations). 331dot (talk) 14:46, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Also see Wikipedia:No amount of editing can overcome a lack of notability. Notability is something that the subject has, not the article. You need to demonstrate that the subject is themselves notable by citing sufficiently in-depth, independent, reliable sources where you got the information for writing the article from. See also WP:42 for a concise explanation. --Jayron32 15:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) So is the problem I need to add more sources inside of the article? The subject is notable. She was the head of the biggest drug trafficking and money laundering organization in the country. Everyone knows who BMF is. Big Meech and Southwest T. She is the longtime girlfriend of Southwest T and was on the indictment. She has had tv shows casted behind her role as well as a Documentary done on her through BET. I am not sure what else I should add. Perhaps those clips inside the article? — Preceding unsigned comment added by Jasminbrown1202 (talk • contribs) 15:23, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Jasminbrown1202, and welcome to the Teahouse. The points you mention in your last paragraph are all relevant to notability in the world, but not one of them is directly relevant to Wikipedia's criteria for notability, which are mostly to do with "is there enough independent material reliably published about this person to base an encyclopaedia article on?" Remember that Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. --ColinFine (talk) 16:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Cleaned up, and added Wikilink to Black Mafia Family. See Help:Referencing for beginners on how to convert URL refs to properly formatted refs. A suggestion: work on refs in your Sandbox, then move to article only when those are in good shape. Up to you to demonstrate that existing or additional refs are about Tonesa Welch. David notMD (talk) 17:31, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people on that Wikipedia page need to be guided through it?[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 15:35, 18 November 2021 (UTC) The relevant page is List of people from Merseyside. As you can see, ACtiling has made many edits to the page, with good intentions, but many have had to be reverted as they also removed people without any reason, and were misplaced. Any guidance from editors here that can be offered to this enthusiastic editor will, I'm sure, help. Ghmyrtle (talk) 15:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) ACtiling Please read the policy at WP:LISTPEOPLE.--Shantavira|feed me 16:09, 18 November 2021 (UTC) This is no longer necessary because the foundations are all for learning and solving problems. by human guides from problem solving and learning and taking reasonable time and facts without forcing or locking control. that future systems will have to run completely spontaneously according to my schedule. Headings can be just general topics. which, as always, repeats and loops — Preceding unsigned comment added by UFOINDY (talk • contribs) 02:55, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Edição[edit] Como editar um artigo? Artajeiro (talk) 15:58, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Google's Translation: Header: Edition Text: How to edit an article? ? Blaze The WolfTalkBlaze Wolf#6545 16:01, 18 November 2021 (UTC) This is the English language Wikipedia. Perhaps you are looking for the Portuguese Wikipedia? --David Biddulph (talk) 16:03, 18 November 2021 (UTC) List of countries[edit] List of countries with their first National Hockey League player - Chris Chelios was born in GREECE (please add this to the list) Cheers, Pat Reid  2001:1970:4CDD:200:2934:2AEC:4C57:DE2 (talk) 16:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please direct your comment to Talk:List of countries with their first National Hockey League player. There, the editors that follow that article will see it. 331dot (talk) 16:49, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Not according to Chris Chelios. --David Biddulph (talk) 16:50, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Edit to Atom (software)[edit] Can someone approve of my edit to atom (software) MCBOiS1210 (talk) 17:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) As far as I can see, MCBOiS1210, you have neither edited Atom (software) nor put a request on Talk:Atom (software). What are you trying to do? --ColinFine (talk) 17:10, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Evidently, I mean Talk:Atom (text editor). --ColinFine (talk) 17:13, 18 November 2021 (UTC) David Leigh Clark[edit] I have been asked to add info for my present Wikipedia reference (David Leigh Clark). I have used online instructions since computes became common but I cannot understand how to add a biography to my name. I registered for an account but need some help. I don't know what a TILDES is?  Pleh15 (talk) 18:07, 18 November 2021 (UTC) For information on not writing an autobiography, see WP:autobiography. To find out about a tilde, see tilde. --David Biddulph (talk) 18:16, 18 November 2021 (UTC)  Courtesy link: David Leigh Clark Wikignome Wintergreentalk 18:17, 18 November 2021 (UTC) "Tildes" is the plural of "Tilde". One tilde: ~ Two tildes: ~~ End a post to a talk page with four tildes, and the system will expand that into your signature plus a timestamp. DS (talk) 19:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) The article needs references that are ABOUT DLC. Referencing to journal articles he authored or co-authored does not confirm his notability. David notMD (talk) 22:46, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Dr. Vin Gupta[edit] Help with AfC for Dr. Vin Gupta Hello! I've had two experienced editors provide excellent feedback for an AfC for Vin Gupta, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Vin_Gupta They've both independently said they had hoped for one last editor to weigh in to ensure an "unbiased outcome" and since its been a few weeks, I was hopeful you might be willing to assist. Thank you again. Caroline grossman23 (talk) 18:20, 18 November 2021 (UTC) It says: "Review waiting, please be patient. This may take 2 months or more, since drafts are reviewed in no specific order. There are 2,397 pending submissions waiting for review." Remember that there is no deadline. --David Biddulph (talk) 18:27, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Permission for a photo[edit] I want to add a photo to the article on my father, mathematician, Beresford Parlett. The original photographer of the photo is now deceased. Just to make sure, I contacted his widow and asked permission to use the photo for the Wikipedia site. She said "yes" to me verbally. However, when I tried to post the photo to the site it was later taken down. How do I get official permission to post this photo? SlamDunk2000 (talk) 18:36, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @SlamDunk2000:: Instructions are available at Wikipedia:Requesting copyright permission; there's a optional form letter for the copyright holder to complete and an email address to send the permission to where someone will verify the proper release of copyright. If you have more specific questions on how to navigate that page, please let us know. --Jayron32 18:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hi SlamDunk2000. What Jayron332 posted above is correct, and I've gone into a little more detail about this on your user talk page. I've also added some information about Wikipedia:Conflict of interest to your user talk page as well for reference. -- Marchjuly (talk) 21:54, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Need help to re-edit page to remove a content problem panel.[edit] Hi there. A panel has just appeared on my wiki page saying that some of the wording on my page is self-promoting for want of a better word. Could anyone help me go through my page and edit it so I can meet the guidelines and get this panel down? thanks! Page link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johanna_Spinks 107.185.204.212 (talk) 19:10, 18 November 2021 (UTC) It seems Njd-de is already working on cleaning up the page (thank you, Njd-de!). If you have further concerns or questions, there's always the article's talk page: Talk:Johanna Spinks. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 20:00, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Sumner bio[edit] It's okay with me if you delete the biography I wrote of myself. I am not a "notable" person and don't meet your guidelines. Indiana Author (talk) 19:41, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Indiana Author: The article was proposed for deletion shorty after you created it, but another editor stepped in, deprodded it and tried to improve it. Wikipedia generally tries to discourage people from creating articles about themselves as explained here and here because they often don't realize what it means to have a Wikipedia article written about them. If you're considered to be someone who doesn't meet any of Wikipedia's notability guidelines like WP:GNG, WP:NAUTHOR, or WP:NPROF, then that would be a valid reason for the article to be deleted. If you just want the article to be deleted because you feel you made a mistake in creating it and are concerned it may somehow have real world implications, then you might also be able to request a courtesy deletion. Otherwise, it might be hard to have the article deleted at this point if other editors are actively working on trying to improve it and feel you actually are Wikipedia notable enough to have an article created about you. The best thing to do might be to seek further assistance at Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons/Noticeboard or Wikipedia:Administrators' noticeboard. -- Marchjuly (talk) 22:26, 18 November 2021 (UTC) If you think it should be deleted, see WP:G7. ? Qwerfjkltalk 15:55, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Edit reversion[edit] FYI?– Separated from above section. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 19:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) So this user reverted my edit to Sir Keir's talk-page and I saw red and added in the link I posted on the talk page on the mainspace (along with an edit summary basically slandering him) which I'd added in the hopes of generating some kind of discussion. Obviously I feel a little foolish about this and wish I hadn't done it. What can I do to make amends? Phil of rel (talk) 19:46, 18 November 2021 (UTC) "spamming"[edit] You asked me to "stop spamming my book." I will comply. However, I defend all the changes I made as factually accurate and documented in the University of Chicago Archives, where I did most of the research for my book on Amos Alonzo Stagg. David E. Sumner, PhD Indiana Author (talk) 19:47, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Even if there was nothing wrong with the additions, hopefully you can understand the conflict of interest, and that Wikipedia edits should be made by people independent of the subject. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 19:57, 18 November 2021 (UTC) For context, I am the user who called his edits spam. user:Indiana Author wrote the autobiographical article David E. Sumner without disclosing his conflict of interest, and then mentioned his recent book in something like 30 different articles at his "publisher's suggestion" [1]. Meters (talk) 20:06, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Indiana Author. Please understand that WP:CITESPAM and WP:BOOKSPAM are problems that the Wikipedia Community is dealing with on a daily basis. It's not impossible to cite one's self in a Wikipedia article, but it is a form of conflict of interest that needs to be done carefully. If the content you're referring above can be found in the University of Chicago archives, then it might be possible to simply cite the archives itself instead of your book. This might not be what your publisher wants, but it might be the best thing for Wikipedia and that matters more. Please take a look at WP:CITINGSOURCES and WP:RELIABLESOURCES for some more general information on this or try asking at Wikipedia:Reliable sources/Noticeboard if you've got any specific questions. -- Marchjuly (talk) 22:04, 18 November 2021 (UTC) I agree 100% with Meters. STOP adding your book to articles. EVERY ONE had been reverted. David notMD (talk) 22:53, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you to all the authors and editors who work or volunteer with Wikipedia to make it reliable and accurate. I use it regularly in my research for a quick reference source and will continue to do so. - David — Preceding unsigned comment added by Indiana Author (talk • contribs) 00:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) How many edits?[edit] What is the easy way to determine exactly how many edits ANOTHER editor (other than yourself) has done lifetime to date? I know how to find my own edits, but another editor is the question. Should be an easy one. First to answer gets a cookie. cookie ? Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 21:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Th78blue: You can go to that user's contribution page and then click the edit count link at the bottom. That will lead to a page like this: [2] with various edit count stats. RudolfRed (talk) 22:13, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Th78blue Hi there. Go to that persons User page or Talk page and (in desktop mode) look on the far left side of the page in the section headed 'Tools'. Then click 'User contributions'. At the page that appears, scroll right to the bottom and click 'Edit count'. This displays a very helpful page summarising all of the edits made by that user in various parts of Wikipedia. In your case, you've made 5,666 edits at the time of posting this. (See here). Once you have the url for xtools, you can replace your own username with that of any other user - assuming you can remember the link. E.g. https://xtools.wmflabs.org/ec/en.wikipedia.org/Th78blue; https://xtools.wmflabs.org/ec/en.wikipedia.org/Nick_Moyes; https://xtools.wmflabs.org/ec/en.wikipedia.org/RudolfRed etc.Nick Moyes (talk) 22:15, 18 November 2021 (UTC) You're both getting cookies! Thanks! Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 22:38, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Okay, one more follow up question for @Nick Moyes: actually (since you're so detailed too!) ?, can you tell me what are "deleted edits? I see in peoples "edit counts" both "Live edits" and "deleted edits"? Thanks! Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 00:31, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Th78blue: If you enable "Navigation popups:" at Special:Preferences#mw-prefsection-gadgets then you can see the edit count (and many other things) just by hovering over a linked username. Deleted edits are edits to currently deleted pages, and edits which have been hidden in the page history (revision deletion). PrimeHunter (talk) 02:02, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Citation help needed[edit] Hey there! Looking for some help navigating a citation issue. I have been adding content and thus additional citations to the page on Catherine Parr (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catherine_Parr). However, my citations are not automatically populating in the reference list as they should. I am wondering why this is happening and if someone could assist me. I have done every tutorial and read every article on wikipedia citations and I sought help on Teahouse but am still stumped. If someone is able to help by explaining it to me like I'm five, I would really appreciate it! Thanks. DrMichelineWhite (talk) 22:17, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DrMichelineWhite. It looks like you asked something similar before at Wikipedia:Teahouse/Questions/Archive 1130#Citations not populating in reference list. Did you see the replies you received? Did the suggestions given not work? It appears that you've made a number of edits to Catherine Parr since August and that , you might have unintentionally damaged the syntax of citations previously added by others with this edit. That is probably why there are now "error" messages are visible in Catherine Parr#Citations since there were no such messages visible in the version prior to your October 1 edit. Adding citations to an article can be tricky to do in some cases when a complicated citation style like WP:SFN has been previously adopted. It's not generally a good idea to try and use multiple citation styles in an article per WP:CITEVAR which means you might've have to figure out a way to incorporate the citations you want to add into the article using the already established style. Perhaps the the best thing to do would be to ask for assistance at Talk:Catherine Parr because that's where you're likely going to find editors who might be able to help you do so if you're unable to figure things out yourself. Finally, please also take a look at WP:EXPERT and WP:CITESELF as well for reference since they might also apply to your situation. -- Marchjuly (talk) 22:56, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Revision history[edit] Yes, I just wanted to know, what's the actual point/benefit of having an articles revision history publicly available going back to the creation of the article, doesn't it just take up more space? And also, what's the oldest revision of any article that's still available on the en.wikipedia.org database? Are there any still accessible publicly going back 20 years ago to 2001? Thanks Hgh1985 (talk) 00:35, 19 November 2021 (UTC) hi Hgh1985 and welcome to the teahouse! simply put: transparency and proper attribution. while it may be hard to find due to how it works, you'd technically be able to figure out who contributed which to the article even back to edits made back in the early years of wikipedia. happy editing!  melecie  t - 01:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Hgh1985: Special:Diff/908493298 is the oldest edit to Wikipedia, from back on January 15, 2001. All the revisions do take up space, but the usefulness of having old revisions outweighs the small-in-the-grand-scheme-of-things cost of keeping them around. Vahurzpu (talk) 01:31, 19 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) :Hello, Hgh1985. The text of each Wikipedia page is both copyrighted and freely licensed for re-use by anyone. The copyright is not held by Wikipedia or the Wikimedia Foundation. The copyright is held by the individual editors who wrote the article. The free license requires attribution to the authors, and one of the functions of the revision history is to provide that attribution. Another function is the ability to correct articles which have become severely damaged by things like copyright violations, libel or threats of violence. An editor can go back through the revision history, find the last undamaged version, and revert to that version. An administrator can hide the damaged versions. So, all of this has legal implications, and data storage is dirt cheap. The software used to run Wikipedia in its early months did not track the revision history but the overwhelming majority of edits are available for review. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 01:34, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Hgh1985: (edit conflict) Our license legally requires that contributions by individual editors to a page can be found. MediaWiki:Wikimedia-copyrightwarning is displayed above the publish button. The database only stores diffs for the revision history. mw:Manual:MediaWiki architecture#Database and text storage says: "The compression ratio achieved on Wikimedia sites nears 98%." It's also useful. I often look far back in page histories to for example see where a problem started, who started it and what else they have done, and whether there is a good earlier version to partially or fully revert to. PrimeHunter (talk) 01:47, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Visual editor creates bugs in refs[edit] Tracked in Phabricator Task T296044 I have noticed that since a few hours, my edits using the Visual Editor create some bugs in the references, both in the English and French WP, e.g. here, here, here. It happens wherever I edit in the article. Is it normal or is it just me? Veverve (talk) 00:35, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Veverve, it's a known and recent bug associated with VisualEditor; see discussion at Wikipedia:Village pump (technical)#VisualEditor duplicating named citations and the Phabicrator task at phab:T296044. DanCherek (talk) 00:43, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Is this allowed or not[edit] Am I allowed to produce an article without any citations? I have been trying to improve the draft [ Draft:Mall of the North ] with reliable sources but I can't seem to find any although the shopping mall is a notable place in the Southern Africa or more specifically South Africa, I have seen few articles with in the main space without any citations and I asked myself if I'm missing something or not (and some with only one or two cites), for an example check out Tsunade, the article has absolutely no source. I was wondering if I would be penalized (blocked or something) if did the same since I cannot find reliable sources to cite Mall of the North. Motlatlaneo (talk) 02:22, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Motlatlaneo! All articles need to be supported by citations to reliable sources. Notability itself is generally determined based on the amount of significant coverage that a topic has received in reliable, independent secondary sources. Yes, there are some existing articles with poor or nonexistent sourcing – the solution is not to create more unsourced articles, but rather to improve those unsourced articles (or delete/redirect them if necessary). You're unlikely to be blocked for creating a single unsourced article, but it might be moved back to draftspace or nominated for deletion if there are no references to demonstrate its notability. Hope that helps. DanCherek (talk) 03:06, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Motlatlaneo I Googled Mall of the North to see if I could find some references for you, and discovered that the first half of your draft article was copied from the Mall's website, the only change being that you wrote "The offers" instead of "Our offers". Once you find good sources for your article it's important that you not copy and paste other's writing word for word, but instead use your own words to tell what you have read. It may be helpful for you to read Wikipedia:Copyright violations to learn more about the importance of not violating any copyright laws. Best wishes on improving your draft article. Karenthewriter (talk) 03:25, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Karenthewriter I have studied the wiki rules and yes I have to admit that was wrong. I'm willing to use my own words so what hoping you'd tell me is that you found something to cite of which you didn't, which means the really isn't anything out there but the mall widely notable — Preceding unsigned comment added by Motlatlaneo (talk • contribs) 03:49, 19 November 2021 (UTC) User Rights[edit] I want to know all about user rights, and know how many of them are there, and what are they. Any assistance. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 02:50, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Itcouldbepossible! Wikipedia:User access levels is a pretty comprehensive source of information about the different user rights on the English Wikipedia. Feel free to ask any follow up questions you have here! DanCherek (talk) 02:56, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks for your help. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 03:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Should I also read the sub-pages, like Further information: Wikipedia:Administration § Human and legal administration??? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 03:11, 19 November 2021 (UTC) That depends on how much time you want to spend reading and how much detail you want to go into If it looks interesting to you, go ahead. You shouldn't feel like you need to read every single information page to be a good editor, though. I don't think that Wikipedia:Administration is one that I myself have read before. DanCherek (talk) 03:17, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks I would try and read everything, if I can. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 03:21, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Someone deleted my comments on a talk page[edit] I'm still a new editor but someone has reverted my talk page comments[3], is this permitted on wikipedia? Thanks in advance. SmolBrane (talk) 02:50, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @SmolBrane As far as I see, your issue has been addressed. See this diff ([4]). Maybe it was an accidental removal. Actually you see, those who do this reverts, or rollbacks, they sometimes make mistakes, because they have to look over so many things, and they sometimes tend to make mistakes. Hope that helps!!!. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 03:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ahhh that makes sense, thank you! SmolBrane (talk) 03:31, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Contributions to Signature[edit] I have seen many who have a contributions section along with their signature. I also want to enable that settings. Can anyone here assist me, on how I can add a contributions tab in my signature?  Itcouldbepossible (talk) 02:52, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Sure – WP:SIG § CustomSig tells you how to customise your signature in preferences (please read the policies and guidelines before trying anything too fancy) and you can link to your contributions using [[Special:Contributions/Itcouldbepossible]]. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 06:13, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh Thanks I will read and do the necessary. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:52, 19 November 2021 (UTC) If a user requests that something is added on a talk page and I (or someone else) has done it, can the request be deleted? Is not, what should be done?[edit] I have noticed some talk pages have sections such as "can x be added to this page?", "y is missing, can it be added?", etc. If I or someone else adds the requested bit of information, what is an acceptable action to take regarding the user's section? I feel that too many redundant and outdated sections can clog up the page, but I'm not sure what is acceptable to do in this case. ReidMoffat (talk) 05:36, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @ReidMoffat: WP:TALK has the general guidelines on talk pages; it's generally better to archive rather than delete discussions or requests that have concluded. Many talk pages are automatically archived by bots; these can be identified by a box at the top of the page indicating that it gets archived. There is also a range of icons that editors use to mark whether a task is done or in progress – {{Done}} shows you the available icons. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 06:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @ReidMoffat: You should find some information in WP:ERREQ and on the documentation page for Template:Request edit about this. The template {{Done}} is OK for many cases, but it's probably better to follow the instructions at Template:Request edit#Response options because of the peculiarities of that particular template's syntax and how edit requests made using it are categorized. Regardless, you shouldn't remove or otherwise modify the posts made by other editors from talk page as pointed out above by ClaudineChionh, except in some certain specific cases like the ones listed in WP:TPO. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:45, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Repeated requests for logins[edit] In the past 30 days, when I enter Wikipedia each day, I notice that I'm not logged in even though each day this appear, I login and check the block "Keep me logged in for 365 days". I'm using a password that was NOT automatically generated by either the Wikipedia software nor by my browser (Chrome). I'm running an iMac under Apple's OSX 10.13.6 and using Google Chrome as a default browser Version 96.0.4664.55 (Official Build) (x86_64) as I have been for several years without this problem. Any suggestions? "What fun would there be if we already knew all there is to know?" 07:39, 19 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by Magillaonfire (talk • contribs) This has been answered at the Help Desk. Magillaonfire, please limit your question to either here or the Help Desk to prevent redundant editor effort. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 08:35, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the not-so-very-helpful reply. I did that hoping that someone in either location would have an answer. Nothing has been changed in either my OS or in my browser settings but I guess I'll just have to take your gentle slap-on-the-nose-with-a-rolled-up-newspaper and go back and check something I've already checked at least twice. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Magillaonfire (talk • contribs) 23:59, 19 November 2021 (UTC) You're welcome. If you still don't get a suitable reply by the time that question is archived, try asking at WP:VPT. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 05:57, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Adding well-referenced negative facts[edit] Hello, I would like to know whether my edits are applicable or not. They are well referenced and I have tried my best to have a neutral tone. Factually, the edits state bad facts, but are rewritten from third-party sources, including major publications like The New York Times. Please vote: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure#Controversies%2FNegative_Facts https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock#Controversies%2FNegative_Facts Centrereded (talk) 09:08, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Centrereded (talk) 09:08, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded I have only checked the second article. When your edit was reverted you were told about WP:BRD and asked to form consensus on the talk page. Instead, you asked there, and here, "What is wrong with my edits?" The answer is that there may or may not be anything wrong with them, but you have been asked to build consensus. So please seek to do that. That does not mean asking what is wrong, it means putting the case for your edits. There is a huge difference. FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 09:20, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded Note, please, This COIN discussion FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 09:23, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @User:Timtrent How do I reach a consensus? I asked people to vote. What's the official way?Centrereded (talk) 10:17, 19 November 2021 (UTC) You started discussions on the Talk pages of those two articles on 19 Nov. For both, you should invite the editors who reverted your repeated attempts to add Controversy sections to the articles, as their Edit summaries were critical of your content and/or referencing. There is no rush. I also have a concern, in that on the Talk pages, you wrote " The words are originally not mine, but from the referenced." Does this mean you are copy/pasting content from the sources? David notMD (talk) 11:25, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded What we are aiming for is a friendly, balanced discussion. Usually, these are informal, with one set fo views holding sway. This builds a simple consensus. We may not agree with a consensus, but we must honour it. If you find that consensus goes against you, and it can, but you feel that your arguments have validity, you can take it further to seek to reach a formal consensus. This is, generally, frowned upon if one has not attempted a simple consensus first. All editors have the right to seek to have their views prevail. No-one of us carries more clout than another of us. One editor equals one opinion, however, consensus is not a ballot, not a beauty pageant. It is the arguments that build consensus, not weight of numbers. Therefore one may ask for an uninvolved editor to "close" any discussion, not necessarily admins. FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 16:42, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Copyright issue[edit] Hi, I am a bit overwhelmed by the huge set of rules on how to report a copyright issue, so I figured I'd just leave it here FYI, and you can do what you will with it. :-) On the German Wikipedia, we have just had to delete a large number of articles by this user. He contributes in at least ten different languages, and his language proficiency in most of these may be doubted. The German articles at least were machine generated, and some of them were barely comprehensible. Since there were only sources given in Azerbaijani language, this was nearly impossible to fix. Now for the copyright issue: The user apparently machine translates snippets from this source and turns them into Wikipedia articles. His necropolis articles at least seem to have evolved that way. The source itself includes a copyright sign and no indication of Creative Commons licensing, so I don't see how this would be public domain material. As the English necropolis articles by this user are nearly identical, I assume that he has used the same method here, maybe - with a little more knowledge of English than German - smoothing things out a little more.  91.34.32.188 (talk) 11:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) FYI - User:Elmar Bax??liyev was indef blocked in 2018 for repeated copyright violations, unblocked in Sept 2021. Since then, has created more than 30 articles in English Wikipedia about archeological sites, some as short as a few sentences with 1-2 refs. The unanswered question is whether EB has returned to copy/translate/paste. David notMD (talk) 11:38, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Definitely. Just throw the appropriate parts from that source into Google Translate, and the result is clear as day. Even though Google Translate does struggle more with the Azerbaijani language than whatever machine this user has been using. --91.34.32.188 (talk) 12:21, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks @91.34.32.188 for bringing this up. If you compare e.g. en:Arat?p? necropolis with az:Arat?p? nekropolu with [5] page 60 Nr. 105 ?r?t?p? n?kr?p?lu its obviously copyvio. I deleted 14 articles of this user in deWP about necropolises as copyright violation from this source. Johannnes89 (talk) 12:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Joe as the admin who unblocked this user -- FYI. --91.34.32.188 (talk) 12:30, 19 November 2021 (UTC) FYI: Elmar Bax??liyev (talk · contribs) indeffed by ToBeFree for copyright violations after a previous indef block for the same issiue. Victor Schmidt (talk) 15:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Maybe someone would care to have a look at the Commons images used by this user, uploaded by another user by the name of Etiunian. I know this is not Commons here, but I have serious doubts as to the copyright situation of those images. Many of them look like scans from books to me. I asked at the Commons "Village pump" about this but didn't get a reply so far. --91.34.32.188 (talk) 21:18, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Why is my Talk Page post in italics?[edit] Hi there, I recently made a new post/section on a Talk Page, and I was wondering why the entire thing is in italics? I tried looking through a few documentation pages, but couldn't seem to find any answers. The post in question is here: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ulrich_Kutschera#Kutschera_2021_article_-_%22Sex_and_Covid-19%22_%28ref._34%29 Thanks for your help! NeuroJasper (talk) 12:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) User:PrincessPersnickety fixed it. David notMD (talk) 13:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi User:NeuroJasper. The post above yours on the talk page used italics, but was missing the code to change it back to normal. Princess Persnickety (talk) 13:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you, User:PrincessPersnickety! I've checked out the revision history to see what you changed, so I can hopefully avoid similar problems in the future. I'll be sure to keep an eye out for angled brackets as one possible cause, the next time I encounter something like this. :) NeuroJasper (talk) 13:09, 19 November 2021 (UTC) You're welcome :) I only know because I encountered the same problem myself a while ago when all my text came out tiny and I couldn't figure out why. Princess Persnickety (talk) 13:13, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Can someone tell me how my draft is looking please?[edit] Hey all, Sorry, first time here and still trying to get used to the Wikipedia layout. May someone please check my recent draft? I've tried to follow all guidelines possible but just want to make sure I'm on the right page. Many thanks Southpointmusic (talk) 15:19, 19 November 2021 (UTC)  Courtesy link: Draft:Southpoint (Record Label) Hi @Southpointmusic! You've successfully submitted your draft, so someone will come along to review it. We have a backlog, so it might take a while, but check back periodically. Cheers, {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 15:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) See your Talk page for explanation for the draft being nominated for Speedy deletion, and the path open to you to appeal the indefinite block of your previous User name. David notMD (talk) 17:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Clarification on dispute resolution[edit] I am headed toward dispute resolution with another editor and, as a relatively new contributor/editor, I want to be clear on the procedure. I had initiated the discussion with him on our individual talk pages because looking at the article talk page there was nothing like a previous us of the page for dispute resolution, nothing much on the page at all. I thought that we could do best talking with each other directly, which we did civilly and thoroughly through the deletion of my original edit, my following his advice in a second edit which was then immed. deleted, etc. ( won't further litigate it here). I see that dispute resolution instructions say "Before making a request here, be sure that the issue has been thoroughly discussed on the article talk page. 3O is only for assistance in resolving disagreements that have come to a standstill." - which this has come to. This has not been on the article talk page, I see no way of productively putting it there at this point. Can I take it to dispute directly from our already existing discussion? I intend to follow the problem to its resolution by a third party or parties. Thank you in advance. Vabookwriter (talk) 15:45, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Vabookwriter (talk) 15:45, 19 November 2021 (UTC) More on dispute question[edit] My confusion is in part because of this kind of inconsistent instruction: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Dispute_resolution There are many methods on Wikipedia for resolving disputes. Most methods are not formal processes and do not involve third-party intervention. Respond to all disputes or grievances, in the first instance, by approaching the editor or editors concerned and explaining which of their edits you object to and why you object. Use the article talk page or their user talk page to do so; be civil, polite, and always assume good faith. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Dispute_resolution_noticeboard/request?withJS=MediaWiki:DRN-wizard.js&withCSS=MediaWiki:DRN-wizard.css Has this issue been discussed extensively on the article talk page? (If you don't know what an article talk page is, answer "Not yet".) Thank you Vabookwriter (talk) 16:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Vabookwriter. Disputes about article content should always be discussed thoroughly on the article talk page before beginning other forms of dispute resolution. Other editors interested in that article will not know what has been said on two editor's talk pages. So, have the conversation in the correct place first before trying anything else. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 16:20, 19 November 2021 (UTC) New page[edit] how to write a new page . Thanks Lelemera (talk) 16:33, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Follow the instructions here. Polyamorph (talk) 17:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lelemera, and welcome to the Teahouse. I will add something to what Polyamorph said: new editors who try to create encyclopaedia articles before they have learnt how Wikipedia works often have a disappointing and frustrating experience, and end up wasting a lot of their own time, and other people's time. My advice to new editors who want to create an article is to put the idea aside for at least six months while you "learn the craft" of editing Wikipedia, by making small improvements to some of our existing six million articles. --ColinFine (talk) 17:19, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Adminstats[edit] Hello I placed administats Template on my userpage 2days ago still not created by the bot. ? ??? ?????? (talk) 17:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) ? ??? ?????? (talk) 17:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) The bot will not process the template on your userpage because you are not an admin. Polyamorph (talk) 17:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) What to do if wording does not reflect cited source?[edit] What to do if wording does not reflect cited source? I'm trying to help clean up some parts of the feminism article that have been changed/added since it received GA status 10 years ago. The second sentence of the article cites a source which, upon checking, does not say what what was written. It seems (to me) to reflect someone's own opinion rather than the source, and I'm also aware that what's on Wikipedia shouldn't copy verbatim. How should I address this? (I've already posted on the talk page about several issues, though not this one in particular, and have received limited feedback). Pernicious.Editor (talk) 18:11, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Pernicious.Editor: Welcome to the Teahouse. If something appears to be editorial opinion, you can boldly remove it. Alternatively, if you would like readers and interested editors to be aware of the problem, you can add a {{failed verification}} template right after the contentious passage. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 20:10, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Would you like to review my draft on "Autism in China"?[edit] Dear all, My draft article page on "Autism in China": https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Autism_in_China#Diagnosis I am drafting a Wikipedia article on "Autism in China", a topic which I believe has notability and which should have its own article, since there are few attempts to synthesize information on this topic. It is my first time ever writing an article though, so may I ask if someone would like to make suggestions on: 1) Organization (Overview — Epidemiology — History and progress, etc.) 2) Grammar and tense (should I stick with present tense throughout?) 3) Sources and citations 4) I tried to upload a poster image of the movie "Ocean Heaven" to the Media coverage— Ocean Heaven section, but it says I don't have the copyright. What should I do? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ocean-heaven-chinese-movie-poster.jpeg (this is the file link) Thanks in advance!! Ha.susulat (talk) 19:48, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Ha.susulat Welcome to the Teahouse. Firstly, well done on getting as far as you have with a Draft article as a brand new user. That's no mean feat in itself. It's not yet in a form where it could be properly 'reviewed', so I have a mix of general comments which I hope may assist you: Firstly, I looked to see what other 'Autism in ....' article there were, and only found Autism in india, which then redirects one to Global perceptions of autism. I presume you were aware of that article? If not, you should perhaps ensure that that page is up to date in the relevant section, or add a subsection for China. It is always possible to add a 'See main article' link to then take a user to a more detailed page. And that, I assume, is what your draft would cover?. It's important not to add general things into a detailed article which ought to have been covered elsewhere. So just use wikilinks to tie these together. Only explain diagnosis procedures if they are remarkably different from elsewhere. If they are, ensure you use reliable source to demonstrate how those procedures differ. (I did think that section was too lengthy) Forget trying to use images with special non-free image rationales in draft articles. Images can be added later, and have no impact on whether a page reaches our bar for Notability. I have now just appreciated that you asked a very similar question a few days ago (now archived here). I can probably add little to what you were told, especially to seek input from editors at WP:WikiProject Autism. I don't think you are wasting your time with this draft, but there is much work still to do before it could be properly reviewed as an article. Seeking feedback or input into the Draft from more specialist editors is probably the right way to go, yet I don't see you having asked there yet. Finally, and out of interest, are you doing this out of general concern, or for a college project, or in order to raise awareness of specific organisations that you represent? It might be a good idea to introduce yourself on your userpage and explain your interests in editing Wikipedia on this topic. There's further advice at WP:COI for anyone already working inside the autism field to make clear their involvement. That won't stop you editing, but we always aim for openness here. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 20:35, 19 November 2021 (UTC) I remember there's an essay on X about Y and how those articles should only be created when the combination of the two topics is notable. Can't remember though. Sungodtemple (talk) 21:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Stub pages[edit] I know I might be taking on a project that I may regret doing (lol) but here we go. I've noticed a plethora of stub pages, especially regarding early 20th century and late 19th century baseball players. I was curious if there is an exact list of how many of these are stubs. I have plenty of resources (meaning websites and books) where I can flesh out a great number of these pages. Keep in mind I'm focusing on the above target and stub pages for current and former NFL players only. Is there a page I can use as a guide for this rather large task?  Sportsfan1976 I'm only here because I'm not currently somewhere else. (talk) 21:17, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Sportsfan1976. Category: Baseball stubs would be a good place to start. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 21:24, 19 November 2021 (UTC) 7M Pages[edit] About when would Wikipedia reach 7 million pages? We're currently almost at 6.5 million pages, and by the looks of it, Wikipedia looks like it could either reach 7M by early-mid 2022, or late 2022-early2023. How long did it take for Wikipedia to get from 5M to 6M? WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:36, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @WaterflameIsAwesome: Welcome to the teahouse. To date, we've reached 6.4 million articles, and so far I'm thinking we can reach to 7 million articles by mid, late 2022. But if article creation increases rapidly, we can reach 7 million by mid 2022. However, if it goes slow, (which I don't expect) we will reach at this point by 2023. Also, for the 5-6M, we aren't sure about this one. But, if wikipedia was made 19 years ago, (19 divided by 5-6 =3-4) I'm estimating to reach either 3 to 4 years. Severestorm28 (talk) 22:47, 19 November 2021 (UTC) English Wikipedia reached five million articles on 1 November 2015, and six million on 23 January 2020. --bonadea contributions talk 23:09, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Bonadea: That would take 5 years. Severestorm28 (talk) 23:36, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ok, so if we're going at the speed of 5-6 million, then I'm guessing maybe 3 more years? lol. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 00:47, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Severestorm28 that would actually take a little over four years. November 1st of 2015 is closer to January 1st 2016 than same date 2015, so it's a little over four years, rather than a little under five years. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:10, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @WaterflameIsAwesome: That's true. Severestorm28 (talk) 18:56, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Archived URLs[edit] How do I know if a website URL has been archived or not? Kaleeb18 (talk) 23:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Kaleeb18: You could always go to archive.org and search for the URL. In the context of references on Wikipedia, there is a tool to automatically add the archive URL into the citation temple. Go to the "View history" tab on any article and click the "Fix dead links" button to access the tool. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 00:59, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Ganbaruby: Thank you so much I found exactly what I needed; that tool saved me a lot of time and work I would've had to do. Kaleeb18 (talk) 04:35, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Watchlists of other editors[edit] I have learned how to see your own edit counts, and the edit counts of other editors etc. But is it possible to see what is on the watchlists of other editors? Thanks! Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 00:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Th78blue! See Help:Watchlist#Privacy. You can't see the contents of other editors' watchlists, and other editors—including administrators—cannot view the contents of your watchlist. Developers who have access to the servers that hold the Wikipedia database can obtain this information. DanCherek (talk) 00:27, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks! That answered my question! Do I then delete this from the "teahouse" since my question is now answered? Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 00:35, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Great! This thread can be left as is, since it might help other editors who have the same question, and a bot will archive it in a couple days. DanCherek (talk) 00:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) PLEASE ACCEPT MY ARTICLE CREATION I WANT TO MAKE ARTICLE WHO POLITICIAN AND CELEBRATIS PERSON[edit] Hi I'm khogendra Rupini i want to create celebrities Article in Wikipedia and i have a one question why Wikipedia decline my article KhogendrarupiniKdr12 (talk) 01:21, 20 November 2021 (UTC)khogendrarupini See the explanation at User_talk:KhogendrarupiniKdr12. You cannot use Wikipedia for promotion. RudolfRed (talk) 01:23, 20 November 2021 (UTC) And please don't shout. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 02:27, 20 November 2021 (UTC) OP has been blocked as a sockpuppet. --Kinu t/c 03:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @KhogendrarupiniKdr12 please be more mature in your Teahouse questions. Shouting is a big no-no as well. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:08, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How do I know if a page is full?[edit] I thought I was getting proficient with Wikipedia, but lately, my edits have been consistently rejected. Wondering what to do and how to contribute more to pages of my interest. Smcupcake19 (talk) 01:34, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Smcupcake19: Wikipedia is not made of paper, so it doesn't really get "full". However, a brief look at your talk page shows that you have been involved in some long and heated debates about Scrappy-Doo and Draft:Scrappy-Doo Biography. Did you have specific questions about the advice that was given to you on those articles' talk pages, or questions about another aspect of editing Wikipedia? ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 01:47, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, the Scrappy debate was specifically where I wanted feedback. I truly do want to make that page look as good as I can; and I was specifically wondering what kinds of edits would be indubitably welcome, since after initial smooth sailing with my endeavor, as I mentioned above my edits now appear to be quickly deleted, even after making several attempts to compromise. After putting a special amount of effort to keep my most recent edit inoffensive and still finding it quickly deemed unacceptable. I'd just like to know how to make sure my edits can have some reliable permanence; doing so is becoming increasingly elusive.--Smcupcake19 (talk) 04:48, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Talk:Scrappy-Doo makes clear that your efforts on Scrappy-Doo and Draft:Scrappy-Doo Biography have run aground on various issues, including copyright and fancruft. I suggest you read Wikipedia:Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass and some of the links therein. Perhaps, after more than a year at this task, you consider other topics, animated or not. David notMD (talk) 10:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Which tag to use for page protect?[edit] Which tag to use for page protect? Coolblack4 (talk) 02:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Coolblack4: You can request page protection at the requests for page protection noticeboard, after you have read the instructions at the top of this page as well as the protection policy. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 02:24, 20 November 2021 (UTC) DS Alert regarding Arab–Israeli conflict[edit] Hi, I have received a DS Alert regarding the Arab–Israeli conflict, but I have made no edits regarding that topic whatsoever. WarKosign who issued the alert previously reverted an edit I made adding Mandaeans to 'See Also' section at the bottom of the Israelites article. I explained to them that scholars see Mandaeans being likely of Judean/Jewish origin and received a DS Alert shortly afterwards regarding the Arab-Israeli conflict. I don't see how the two topics are related. I have left a message on their talk page but have not received a reply. Can you please advise on how to resolve this issue. Thanks. Mcvti (talk) 02:18, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hi @Mcvti! The idea of something being related to the Arab–Israeli conflict is interpreted extremely loosely, so an article like Israelites would probably qualify. DS Alerts, while they might look scary, mean what they say that you haven't done anything wrong, so there's not any issue that you have to worry about resolving. It's just a "heads up, this is a sensitive topic area, so please be cautious". Feel free to carry on editing! Cheers, {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 02:50, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Logo Update Not Appearing in Article[edit] I recently have been updating Major Arena Soccer League and tried to update the league's logo by uploading the logo's .svg as a new version of the existing logo. It seems to work, but the thumbnail of the current logo in the file history and it's representation in the article itself seem to be the old logo. The non-free use rationale and the licensing should be identical as the existing logo, so I'm confused at what I need to do to make the logo on the article update. Logo in question: File:Major Arena Soccer League logo.svg  Packerfan213 (talk) 04:09, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Packerfan213: The logo seems to be appearing in the article now, but a couple of other things for reference. Please don't display non-free content anywhere other than the article namespace per non-free content use criterion #9. If you want to discuss a non-free file, provide a link to it instead as explained here. Please don't overwrite a file like you did in this case except for only minor changes like a size reduction, straightening, minor coloring change, etc. When a logo completely changes like what seems to be the case here, it's better to upload it as a completely new file altogether. Another reason for doing this is related to #3 below. This new version of the logo seems like it might actually not need to be licensed as non-free per c:COM:TOO United States and wordmark. All-text logos tend to be considered too simple for copyright protection in the United States; so, you actually might be able to upload this to Commons instead of Wikipedia under a license of c:Template:PD-textlogo. You might want to ask about this at c:COM:VPC just to make sure, but I think it should be OK for Commons. — Marchjuly (talk) 04:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Marchjuly: Thanks for the quick reply! Is there any way for an admin to delete the file history of the old logo to keep it at just the original then? I'll go to Commons and make a new file upload with the proper licensing info; I made a similar upload for the text based logo of the Milwaukee Wave. Packerfan213 (talk) 04:43, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Just revert back to the original version and add {{furd}} to the top of the file's page. The will mark the unused revisions of the file for speedy deletion per WP:F5. — Marchjuly (talk) 04:58, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks again! Sorry for making a mess out of that file's history, but everything should be sorted now I hope. Packerfan213 (talk) 05:10, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hey, I need help...[edit]  User98207252129 (talk) 05:13, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hey, I have a question, where can I report a Vandalism I saw in an article from Sinterklaas? If you go to this link and see the left side of the revision. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sinterklaas&type=revision&diff=1056159685&oldid=1056159438 by 184.16.185.34 (talk+ · tag · contribs · filter log · WHOIS · RBLs · proxy check · block user · block log · cross-wiki contribs · CheckUser (log)), Thanks! @User98207252129: nothing to worry about. As evident from the Difflink you gave above, the edit has already been reverted by Acroterion. See Wikipedia:Vandalism to learn more about vandalism and how to combat it. Please be aaware that not everything unconstructive is nessesary vandalism. Victor Schmidt (talk) 06:34, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Make sense. Thank you for your response! — Preceding unsigned comment added by User98207252129 (talk • contribs) 07:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How to cite this[edit] I want to cite the management plan for the Hidden Christian Sites in the Nagasaki Region world heritage site. It can be found here however it doesn't open the management plan just the link to open it, how can I cite the file directly, Thank You. Tai123.123 (talk) 06:32, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Tai123.123: Instead of linking the listing, you can use the document URL instead, which appears to be https://whc.unesco.org/document/160504. A cite to this would look something like this:[1]. When citing a PDF as large as this, please do not forget specifying the page number. Victor Schmidt (talk) 06:45, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Tai123.123: I've tweaked Victor Schmidt's example above to include the year of publication and an example page number for you. I agree that a 351 page document, 191Mbyte download is far too large to use as a supporting citation without giving a page number. Because it is likely that such an extensive reference might be used multiple times throughout the document, I've used the REFNAME feature to give it a name so that you can call up the citation two or more times without having to re-enter the details. Thus, five uses of that source across a long article would link to just one entry in the 'References' section, which is much tidier than repeating it five times. Your can use the {{rp}} template to insert the exact page number after each use of the reference. Thus: Hidden Christians passed on their faith from one generation to the next.[1]:?23? Most elements are found along coastal areas and remote islands.[1]:?86? Plans have been prepared to build renewable energy facilities in both the suburbs and on some of the remote islands. This will include solar, tidal and wind energy generation.[1]:?265? I hope you might find that useful. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:52, 20 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ a b c d "Comprehensive Preservation and Management Plan - Hidden Christian Sites in the Nagasaki Region" (pdf). Unesco World Heritage Centre. 2017. p. 350-351. Retrieved 2021-11-20. Need Help[edit] I really need help finding the real names of two esports players in the 2019 MotoGP eSports Championship. There gamertags are XxBoMbeR_45xX and Rllorca. If you ever find their names include them in this page: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2019_MotoGP_eSports_Championship MickeyD's234 (talk) 07:58, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @MickeyD's234 I have moved the page you created to Draft space as it is uncited and probably not notable. I suggest you focus on addressing that, rather than worrying about the real persona of two video gamers. You should submit it through Articles for Creation process when it eventually is. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I keep getting "you need consensus" but when i reply i get no response back.[edit] I keep getting "you need consensus" but when i reply i get no response back. what does it means and why aren't those who post this answering me? I wish to include a solar time-lapse on the "sun" article. can be viewed here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XBmLER08Ryw Daviddayag (talk) 11:03, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I see the issue at Talk:Sun, I think the responder (ScottishFinnishRadish) to your edit request wanted more information about where you want the image placed in the article, what you want as the image caption, why is the image needed? They also wanted to see if you can get input from other users to make sure the image is suitable for inclusion in the featured article Sun (one of wikipedia's highest quality articles). It is better to open a new discussion at Talk:Sun, outline your case for including the image, and see if any regular editors there agree. If so then either they can help you to add the image or you can submit a new edit request. If you have trouble finding someone to respond (perhaps not many people are watching that page), you can try asking at the astronomy wikiproject here: Wikipedia_talk:WikiProject_Astronomy. Polyamorph (talk) 11:26, 20 November 2021 (UTC) It would be more appropriate in the sunspot article, but there are already several good videos there. Also, you have already been told that you should not be adding links to your own YouTube channel.--Shantavira|feed me 11:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Sun - arcs of plasma They're not adding links to their youtube channel, they have uploaded the video to commons. Polyamorph (talk) 12:03, 20 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Hello @Daviddayag, and welcome to the Teahouse. I can see you've taken and already uploaded to Commons some pretty cool images, and I'm sorry you felt you'd hit a brick wall. I can see why, though it's really down to a simple misunderstanding I think. You made a 'protected page edit request' and were asked to get consensus to add it. The reason for that was that the editor who responded to your edit request would not necessarily have been one experienced in the article, so they advised you to seek CONSENSUS. Unfortunately, I don't think you appreciated that you were expected to initiate that discussion yourself, and that's why nothing has happened, thus far. My advice is to start a new section at Talk:Sun, headed something like 'Proposal to add plasma arc'. Then embed the image as I've done here, with the caption you would propose to use (it doesn't have to be the default one you see here). Most importantly, explain your rationale for inserting it. Would it replace an existing image, to which section would it go in, what textual statement would it support. Sign it and then wait for comments. Then, if there is no response after a week or so, you could be justified to WP:BEBOLD and add it yourself. If the majority view of responders is that it would be a bad idea, then you could discuss further, but eventually be prepared to accept that consensus is against you. Having 'been bold' it's possible your addition might be immediately reverted, and then you can start a discussion on the merits of having yet another image in that article. Now, when I started this, I assumed you did not have the 'auto-confirmed' status to edit semi-protected articles, but you do. So, the choice is yours whether to be bold and simply add it, or start that discussion first. I strongly advise the latter course, and I hope my response has given you a path forward and not discouraged you in any way. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 11:48, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Daviddayag You have exhibited a pattern of adding your own telescope photos to articles when perhaps one more image is not useful, and worse, inserting your name and other unnecessary information in the image captions. Please return to the articles and remove your name. David notMD (talk) 12:27, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Agree with this, you shouldn't add your name to image captions - it is already credited in commons where you uploaded the file. Polyamorph (talk) 12:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Good spot. I've now removed the credit from two articles as it's easily findable in the Commons link, and goes against our policies for crediting pictures within articles. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:58, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Reliable sources[edit] Hi, I'm new to all this, and trying to write an article about a social media personality and youtuber. For this type of article, the usual obvious reliable sources like journal articles and books are few and far between. I have tried to use the best quality sources I can find, like published articles. However, sometimes there is no independent secondary source, so I was wondering: Is using the primary source acceptable (e.g. the YouTube video I refer to, or the about page that states the view count of a channel)? If so, should it be cited as a source or linked to in some other way? Twdavies (talk) 13:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Not for notability, and YouTube, as a rule, is a very dodgy source in the first place. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 13:44, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Twdavies Welcome to the Teahouse. Unfortunately, as was hinted at above, our Notability criteria means that we ignore views or follower counts on YouTube as a measure of notability. We focus instead on whether independent media or other reliable sources have written about that person in detail and in depth. Unless those sources are available, it's unlikely that there would be any article accepted about them. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 14:13, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for your reply, I was thinking more in terms of whether a source is reliable as a source of information, rather than whether it is adequate to demonstrate notability. I believe I have some other sources for other parts of the article that show some level of notability, whether or not it is enough is another issue that I will tackle separately if need be. So the views and follower count were just included as pieces of information, rather than as evidence of notability. I have also found, in the link to the reliable sources page above "For example, even extremely low-quality sources, such as social media, may sometimes be used as self-published sources for routine information about the subjects themselves." And I believe this answers my question of whether some of my sources are adequate. If I am mistaken, please let me know. Twdavies (talk) 14:32, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Twdavies No, I think you're right. I'm sorry I didn't quite appreciate what you're asking. We generally trust the person's own SM feeds on trivia, but not on key factual statements about them. Thus, we gave TV presenter, Chris Packham's, birth date based upon one of his Facebook posts, if I remember correctly. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 14:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for your help Twdavies (talk) 14:54, 20 November 2021 (UTC) As the declining AfC reviewer, the user reached out to me on my talk page, here was my response: Youtube/Reddit/Twitter/Twitch - Most social media stuff is going to be considered unreliable (even if it came directly from the person's mouth, unfortunately). With user-generated content, anyone can say they are a big deal or make outlandish claims and give no information to back it up. Additionally, sites like that are often filled with people who are self-promotional and using those promotional sources in an article to try and paint a good PR picture about themselves on Wikipedia. Apple Podcasts/Spotify, etc. - These sources just show that the podcast exists. They don't really tell us anything about the subject. If they do, it is often written by the host themselves, and that brings us back to the user-generated content situation above. At its core, Wikipedia is a bunch of nerds, and so the site still looks at sources like you would use for an essay in school (newspapers, TV, reputable websites, etc.) For example, let's look at Gus' Wikipedia article (Just because Gus has one and not Eddy does not automatically mean that Eddy should have one, BTW. See WP:OSE): there are definitely some similar issues with the sources there, but Gus also has coverage from the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel and the Burnett County Sentinel. (Note that Gus' article doesn't mention his recent controversies, which is talked about on the talk page for the article. Basically, they can't find a reliable source that gives a shit about Youtube Drama. In closing, I want to thank you for wanting to put a good article together. Making articles for YouTubers is super difficult, because the guidelines of who is notable enough are not well understood. For more information on reliable sources, you can look at Wikipedia:Reliable sources or at one of my favorite lists on the site Wikipedia:Reliable sources/Perennial sources, which looks at many well-known sources and whether or not Wikipedia would consider them reliable. Happy editing! Bkissin (talk) 18:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) SUGGESTION(actually): A small idea for improved understanding....[edit] I don't want to spend a bunch of time one this, as I'm virtually certain it will be wasted... HOWEVER, having said that, hopefully it will make it to someone that knows how to use Wikipedia, and is willing and enthusiastic about navigating through the warren of minutia to make it a slightly better tool over time for everyone. I was reading an article here (which I occasionally do), as this seems to be a helpful tool for the most part, AND... I noticed when reading the following excerpt (keeping in mind, this suggestion has ABSOLUTELY ZERO TO DO WITH THE SUBJECT MATTER): QUOTE: "On 19 August 1958, a West Berlin court fined the former xxxxxxxxxx leader 35,000 marks (approximately £3,000, or US$8,300) (equivalent to €81,248 in 2017)," OBSERVATIONS: =======[edit] 1) You'll notice the author of that statement went to some considerable length to try and enhance the understanding of the reader, by taking an otherwise objective monetary value and translating it for the reader into a currency the reader was likely to understand, AND.... adjusting it for inflation so the reader would have some idea as to the relative value/scope of the amount of money that is being referenced. 2) GREAT! The point of any encyclopaedia is to increase the understanding of things for actual human beings. LOVE IT! 3) This method of translating a continually shifting value (virtually no currency's value stays the same over time, ever! Right?) is not unique, it is often used here and in other places that I'm aware of, to help readers understand a relative amount of currency/money/wealth over time. Often I've seen historical values expressed as "a year's worth of wages in today's money" for example. Very useful in producing human understanding by comparison within a contemporary context, and one with which almost every human being on the planet can relate! 4) If you'll notice, the quoted excerpt mentions "2017". Well, that is a couple years old already and time (in so far as I know) is not going to stop, it's going to keep going, and going, and going, and going... AND... that number including what it means/represents is going to continue to slip further, and further, and further away from it's once accurate translation??!?!? It's not going to get MORE ACCURATE, it's going to continually get less accurate, defeating the whole purpose for which it was intended, understanding it's relative value. 5) Since it would not be very efficient to go back and adjust every one of the attempts to create monetary translations that make sense, by manually recalculating them and adjusting them for inflation periodically, and almost impossible to do considering the number of pages and locations where the technique is used over Wikipedia, it occurred to me that there really ought to be a better way. SUGGESTION: =====[edit] (AND,... sorry it took so long to get here, BTW) WHY NOT CREATE SOME SORT OF PROGRAMMABLE, INLINE, WIDGET YOUR WRITER/EDITOR COMMUNITY COULD DEPLOY THAT WOULD CONSTANTLY SHOW THE READER, WHAT THAT ORIGINAL VALUE IS WORTH TODAY, RIGHT NOW... AT THE TIME OF PULLING THE PAGE? Computers are GREAT at repetitious calculation that would put humans to sleep! This looks to me like a perfect use of the kind of things computer excel at, and would benefit the readers and the writers a great deal, I would think. If you can have a little widget that translates the definition of words inline, so... the reader can hover and get the definition of a word, or the relevance of a name, or... whatever the editor thinks could use enhanced understanding, why not have the same kind of widget for historical monetary translation and adjustment? Inputs: Historical Amount(i.e the original number), Historical date being referenced, and Original Currency. Calculation: Depending on the Historical date/era.... reference the correct table(dataset), probably Gold or CPI. "Boil" the Inputs down to an objective, un-adjusted universal value. Read in the language of the user's browser to get the correct currency with which the user is likely to be familiar. Output: Take the objective, un-adjusted universal value and adjust it for inflation. Convert the adjusted value to the currency likely used by the reader based on the language lookup. Present the relevant number in the Hover. (AND... it's obviously going to be more complex than that. The point here is that it is doable with some effort, enthusiasm, and concern for the reading audience.) Thanks for any time and effort expended on behalf of the reading public. DoNotShootAtMe (talk) 15:51, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, welcome to the teahouse. I apologise, initially I thought this was spam, thanks to Theroadislong for letting me know it wasn't. What you are describing sounds very similar to a template that already exists described here: Template:To USD. Similar templates exist for other currencies, e.g. Template:To EUR. Polyamorph (talk) 19:13, 20 November 2021 (UTC) See also Template:Inflation, Template:FXConvert and related templates listed there. Nick Moyes (talk) 19:20, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Rootsweb.org/shelby does NOT exist - replaced with https://algenweb.org/shelby[edit] How do I remove the old rootsweb.org/shelby from Wikipedia and add the new and correct link replacement https://algenweb.org/shelby ... they are sometimes listed in outside related links and/or links on Wikipedia. Thank you. Bjseales (talk) 16:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Bjseales: When asking for assistance, it's helpful to mention the name of the Wikipedia article you're referring to. Your three attempts to include yourself in the Thompson High School article have been reverted. "Notable alumni" sections include people who meet Wikipedia's definition of notability and Wikipedia articles exist about them. It is not a place to list everyone who graduated from the school. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 16:40, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Users only edits are to add spam links to their own websites. Theroadislong (talk) 17:55, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-redirect-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a redirect that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A redirect you created, {{{1}}}, which redirected to [[{{{2}}}]], was under discussion, and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a redirect fits our redirect guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) see question above. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:23, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Rows and Columns[edit] Hey guys! How do you edit rows and columns to Wikitables in the source editor? I screwed up trying to do this and had to use the visual editor. Thanks! BubbaDaAmogus (talk) 18:28, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @BubbaDaAmogus Tables are fiendishly hard. Help:Introduction to tables with Wiki Markup/1 is a good place to start. Use your sandbox and play FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 18:31, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1056264832" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 20 November 2021, at 19:20 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH Hoary, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 The Future of Wikipedia 2 Draft:Shyam Sunder Jyani 3 How to create click to drop down segments of an article? 4 What to do about unsourced, promotional, biographical articles? 5 I would like to add people on Merseyside people on that Wikipedia page need to be guided through it? 6 Sumner bio 7 Contributions to Signature 8 If a user requests that something is added on a talk page and I (or someone else) has done it, can the request be deleted? Is not, what should be done? 9 Repeated requests for logins 10 Adding well-referenced negative facts 11 Copyright issue 12 Why is my Talk Page post in italics? 13 Can someone tell me how my draft is looking please? 14 Clarification on dispute resolution 14.1 More on dispute question 15 New page 16 Adminstats 17 What to do if wording does not reflect cited source? 18 Would you like to review my draft on "Autism in China"? 19 Stub pages 20 7M Pages 21 Archived URLs 22 Watchlists of other editors 23 PLEASE ACCEPT MY ARTICLE CREATION I WANT TO MAKE ARTICLE WHO POLITICIAN AND CELEBRATIS PERSON 24 How do I know if a page is full? 25 Which tag to use for page protect? 26 DS Alert regarding Arab–Israeli conflict 27 Logo Update Not Appearing in Article 28 Hey, I need help... 29 How to cite this 30 Need Help 31 I keep getting "you need consensus" but when i reply i get no response back. 32 Reliable sources 33 SUGGESTION(actually): A small idea for improved understanding.... 33.1 ======= 33.2 ===== 34 Rootsweb.org/shelby does NOT exist - replaced with https://algenweb.org/shelby 35 Autoconfirmed user 36 Template:Uw-create-kept 37 Template:Uw-redirect-kept 38 Rows and Columns 39 Request for feedback on draft of article 40 How do I remove a picture from my sandbox? 41 Can I add another editor for my own sandbox? 42 Trying to create a list of beastars characters article. 43 Question 44 List formatting 45 The article that I want to create already has a draft. 46 Please help review me for "Jaymark_215! 47 Audio sample 48 Article name problem 49 How do you use gadgets on other languages' Wikipedias? 50 What are the templates for "Year of the tiger" and "This user likes cats". 51 Is therese sources sufficient for an article? 52 Official name for Malaysia language 53 HELP 54 Addition of sources to Myles Moylan page 55 How can I contribute to Wikipedia page 56 Draft:Mikhail Kozlov (politician) 57 How to upload the logo for a walking trail 58 How to hyperlink Wikipedia to other wiki sites 59 How to add a reference text 60 How to edit the references 61 How do I reply directly to Nick Moyes? 62 How to create a second sandbox? 63 You can… use VisualEditor on this page? 64 Copypasting, when it isn't copyvio 65 Writing a page on British Aviation during WWII Most recent archives 1112, 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131 The Future of Wikipedia[edit] Firstly, thank you for the invitation. Due to Wikipedia relying solely on Donations - would it be a possibility that Wikipedia would ever close? I have donated and will donate to WikiMedia, but I think a fundraising option would be great, to advertise Wikipedia's need for donations internationally in person, in the streets. Just a couple of thoughts, Best Regards, StrawberryFieldsChorley StrawberryFieldsChorley (talk) 23:57, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for your donations. Wikipedia needs donations, but I haven't heard that it's particularly pressed for money. So if you have more and are feeling magnanimous, consider one of the various alternatives. (Médecins Sans Frontières seems good.) -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @StrawberryFieldsChorley As Hoary says, 'thank you'. The Wikimedia Foundation actually raises a lot more money than is required simply to meet technical support and server costs, not to mention the 12GW/h of electricity needed to meet the demands of being one of the top most-visited websites in the world. Very large amounts of money are spent in educational and outreach work, especially in the less developed parts of the world where education and access to information is so needed. So, to answer your question as to whether any of the multiple language versions of Wikipedia would ever close, on a purely funding basis, I think the answer is "no". Though, were it ever to spend, year on year, more than it brings in annually, then it could find itself having to 'draw its horns in'. The people who have actually written the content in the 6.2million+ articles on English Wikipedia are all volunteers - just as they are in the myriad of other language projects. So rest assured that your donations never end up in the pockets of us editors. We do it all for the enjoyment and the satisfaction. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:34, 17 November 2021 (UTC) All that said, though, of course Wikipedia will end one day, as will everything humans have created. "Ever" is a very long time. DS (talk) 02:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Can't disagree with that one iota! Nick Moyes (talk) 21:40, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes is right. Given the fact that Wikipedia is the 13th most visited site in the world, and the largest encyclopedia in the history of the world by more than nearly triple the amount that the second largest has, the likelihood of Wikipedia or any other language variants closing is not very great. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 14:43, 17 November 2021 (UTC) "Too big to fail" is not a waterproof argument. Megaupload had fifty million daily users when it was shut down (and Wikipedia is more illegal in some countries than Megaupload was in the US). TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 09:40, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi @StrawberryFieldsChorley: - Wikipedia (specifically, the Wikimedia Foundation) publishes their financial details here. The gist of it is that: They currently get more from donations and grants than they spend, They have around $170 million in cash in their bank account(s), They spend around $2.5 million a year to keep the website running - the rest is for employees, projects, outreach, scholarships, etc. So in case donations suddenly stop entirely, I’m fairly sure they’d be able to cut off a lot of expenses and be able to make do - maybe for 10 years. Of course, 95% of internet users and big tech companies would prefer to not have Wikipedia suddenly disappear, so I’m sure something will get figured out. Juxlos (talk) 10:21, 19 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add that maybe non-English Wikipedia sites may close at some point earlier than the English Wikipedia, due to those sites not being as popular as the English Wikipedia, and having less pages, and albeit less contributors, but let's not focus on that, XD. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:38, 19 November 2021 (UTC) WMF or no, Wikipedia will continue to exist in some form or other for as long as humans have relatively unfettered access to the internet. People will host their own copies of the database, and eventually someone will make their copy updateable, and other people will do the same, and eventually one of those copies will become so much more popular than the others that it crowds them out, and Wikipedia will exist again. DS (talk) 01:15, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Shyam Sunder Jyani[edit] FYI?– Removed leading spaces – ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) Hello there, I am new with Wikipedia community. When I made first edit on a Wikipedia article, I was on cloud nine. After that, I made few other minor changes. I submitted an article to publish. The page url is https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Shyam_Sunder_Jyani . Unfortunately, it has not been accepted and declined. The person whom I wrote article has a significant coverage on print media, online media and with few Govt. official websites. Could you guide me how should I provide accurate and reliable information so that if it get approved if it meets with wikipedia guidelines? I also want to learn best practices of wikipedia. Best, Jakhar Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:52, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: The links in the decline message tell you what you need to do to show that the subject of this article is notable – provide reliable, independent, secondary sources, and cite them using Wikipedia's referencing methods. Verifiability tells you why it's important to add sources to articles and how you can identify reliable sources. Your first source, a faculty profile from the professor's college, would probably be considered a self-published source, and besides, it doesn't say why he is notable. I am not certain whether India Today would be considered reliable (see discussion at § India Today or IndiaToday.com) but even if it is, you would need more than one good source. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) FYI?– Fixed indentation per WP:THREAD – ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) Thank you ClaudineChionh so much for your prompt response and teaching me about reliable sources. Yes, there are few reliable sources are available. Below are the few sources where about him and his initiative is covered in this year. Could you help me out if these are the reliable source? https://www.unccd.int/actionsland-life-programme/land-life-award-2021-healthy-land-healthy-livesBe https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/rajasthan-women-vow-to-nurture-green-family/article34862254.ece https://www.dw.com/en/familial-forestry-in-india-caring-for-trees-like-theyre-family/a-59215321 https://www.unccd.int/news-events/2021-land-life-award-winner-familial-forestry https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CgYwtwGedxg Thank you and I patiently waiting for your further guidance. Jakhar Singh — Preceding unsigned comment added by Jakhar Singh (talk • contribs) 09:35, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Please keep replies threaded by indenting your reply with a colon at the start, and sign your reply adding four tildes (~~~~) at the end. You can enable the Discussion Tools beta feature to indent and sign your replies automatically on talk pages – look for this in Preferences. As to your sources: WP:RSP is a good place to start looking for discussions and consensus on the reliability of many sources. The Hindu: generally yes Deutsche Welle (DW): It's not in the table but archived discussions suggest yes United Nations agencies: It depends on the topic and the agency (see discussion at § Is the United Nations a Reliable Source?) – specific sources should be discussed on the article/draft talk page. YouTube: usually no — Preceding unsigned comment added by ClaudineChionh (talk • contribs) 10:12, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you ClaudineChionh for teaching me. I will look for the sources you suggested. For a new article, Would it be good if just brief about the object in few lines (e.g. 3-5 lines) so it can be approved easily and then subsequent edits can be made? The article which I am writing, he is a Govt. college Professor and apart from his teaching job, he works for environment and society so could I use the phrases like environmentalist and social worker? Could you teach me what needs to keep in mind while writing a first article for best practices? Best Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:38, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Every fact or descriptive phrase you use must be supported by reliable sources. You can read about the steps to create an article, though as I am not an article reviewer, I am not the best person to ask for advice on this process. You are strongly advised to read your first article as well, and it's also a very good idea to spend some time on other tasks here before creating a new article, which is one of the more difficult tasks in Wikipedia. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Everyone has a slightly different style of articles and word choices - and in this case, one set of phrases you can use is "Shyam Sunder Jyani is an Indian environmentalist and academician". Looking at a glance from google news, I would say Mr. Jyani here does pass Wikipedia's notability guidelines - I hope you don't mind if I stir the article draft up a bit. Juxlos (talk) 10:31, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Minor point: an academician is a member of an academy; it can be used about an academic in general, but academic is a much more common term for a person who works as a professor, lecturer, or researcher at a university. --bonadea contributions talk 10:50, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Fair enough. Regardless, article has been extended with sources ranging from 2009 to 2021 - fairly sure it's good to go, if a bit stubby. Regardless I'm not familiar with the reviewer side of AfC so I'd let other editors do it. Juxlos (talk) 11:01, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Juxlos, Thank you so much for drafting the article of Shyam Sunder Jyani. As I am new with wikipedia hence in the learning phase so I started this Teahouse help talk with ClaudineChionh then you came in and did a great job. The voluntary continuation of wikipedians to humanity is really commendable. I really admire your voluntary services. Bless you. I will keep enhance my learning and give my best to this wikipedia community. P.S. Juxlos, there are minor phrases or grammer tweaks that need to be corrected in the article. I think I am now able to do this... Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:28, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How to create click to drop down segments of an article?[edit] I would like to know how to create one of those click-to-drop-down aspects of an article? I would like to make this page (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sharksploitation) more accessible. People can choose to view the films by release order or alphabetical order or alphabetical for the first film with it's sequels below it. As it is now I need to use Ctrl-f to find what I am looking for Simdude1990 (talk) 16:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Do you mean a sortable table? Help:Table has a lot of information about how to create and format tables. Or do you mean "collapsed" content, where you can hide or show part of the content on a page? That's usually not recommended for articles – there is some information about it here. --bonadea contributions talk 16:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990: – I didn't manage to ping you the first time... --bonadea contributions talk 16:32, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I mean the collapsed segments. I am thinking something like the following Films in Alphabetical order (collapsed) Films in Alphabetical and Sequel order (collapsed) Films by Genre/type (collapsed) Films in release order (standard article, non-collapsible) - Although I will probably invert the list and separate it by year (or group of years eg 1980-1985, 2000's etc.)--Simdude1990 (talk) 16:44, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990: Welcome to the Teahouse. Like Bonadea said, collapsible content generally shouldn't be collapsed per the Manual of Style. Perhaps sortable tables would work better for you? —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 19:55, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990 Firstly, there genuinely isn't enough content in that page to warrant any collapsing/hiding; I can't imagine why on earth you'd think there is? I do, however, agree with @Tenryuu, and feel that a sortable table would allow users to sort these films by year or by title, or by anything else you felt inclined to add. But that would only merit being collapsible were there some other content worthy of bringing to the fore, but I don't see any on this topic. (An example of a very lengthy article that I created which can have its one table hidden to make the whole page more viewable can be found here). Secondly, I really fail to understand why this page exists under that title. Surely it would be better as a List article (e.g. List of sharksploitation films). Nick Moyes (talk) 01:01, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for your input, a sortable table seems like the way to go, I didn't know they existed. I intend on including a lot of other films that are missing from the list, when they are included I'm sure it will be quite large. I may change it to a list page, however, myself or others may add other information that would make it no longer just a list. Some of the films to add don't have Wikipedia pages, they all have IMDB pages or foreign wikis see here for an example. Is it ok to link to those from the movie title? or would it be better to have this (IMDB) next to the corresponding film? or no link except for in the references?--Simdude1990 (talk) 10:55, 18 November 2021 (UTC) List articles on Wikipedia should contain items that still abide by Wikipedia's content policies, particularly verifiablilty and notability. Generally that means that each film should have its own English Wikipedia article (I specify English because other languages tend to have less strict content policies and guidelines); IMDb and foreign wikis aren't acceptable as they are for the most part user-generated, which trashes verifiability. Lists aren't expected to be exhaustive. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 17:07, 18 November 2021 (UTC) "IMDb and foreign wikis aren't acceptable as they are for the most part user-generated" Literally so is this English version of Wikipedia..... I can always build the appropriate pages later and link them in properly, just in the interim, a link so someone can look into the film beyond the list. I will only add films that I have seen, at least then I won't add anything that does not exist--Simdude1990 (talk) 10:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Literally so is this English version of Wikipedia. That is correct, which is why editors are not allowed to cite Wikipedia itself. There's no deadline to have any article "finished", so I'd focus on establishing films' notability with high-quality reliable sources and creating articles for those before adding them onto the list. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 16:30, 19 November 2021 (UTC) What to do about unsourced, promotional, biographical articles?[edit] Hi, I recently came across the article Fayez Barakat while browsing recent changes. The article has mostly been edited by users that only write about Fayez Barakat, has no citations, and the two references with ISBNs seem to be published by a company that has only published books on Fayez Barakat. It contains plenty of unsourced direct quotes, and passages such as: "He is best known as one of the world's most important collectors and dealers of ancient art"; "At the age of 14 Barakat was offered a Fulbright Scholarship to study medicine in the United States on account of his remarkable aptitude for absorbing and understanding information" [seems extremely unlikely]; "Barakat remarks that 'our mind cannot penetrate the mystery of the Universe. We know that the number of galaxies is endless, and we try to listen with the ears of our soul the music they make moving across the infinite skies'. He looks at the universe and at the multitude of galaxies and constellations with a subliminal and telepathic telescope, seeing those eternal lights moving across the infinite through the intuitive eye of his heart. He tries to evade the boundaries of this galaxy through the intuitive dimension, breaking through the limits of space and time, and see the entirety of the infinite and of the eternal. In doing so, he fuses himself into the quantum field, into the energy moving the universe on a sub-atomic and global level. The energy the artist impresses on the canvas is the one that permeates his soul, intellect, senses and instincts, and merges into the energy which animates and moves the universe."; and so on. What do I do about this? It seems to me that the entire article should be deleted for a complete lack of sources or anything establishing notability. But how do I proceed to do this? Do I just start a proposal for deletion? Should I post on the Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons/Noticeboard to get someone more experienced to look it over, or is there something else that would be the best course of action? Thanks in advance for any help! Knuthove (talk) 20:19, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Knuthove (talk) I looked at Fayez Barakat and see it is now tagged as having multiple issues. In addition, the talk page has a new Conflict of Interest tag. Thank you for bringing this to the attention of other editors. Karenthewriter (talk) 22:39, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Knuthove, Never be afraid to remove unverified info, especially puffery of this kind. - hako9 (talk) 22:44, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Knuthove Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. I see that a number of editors have now tagged the article with their concerns, and I have personally removed swathes of uncited trivia and promotional text, and warned the IP editor about declaring a conflict of interest Assuming you are motivated to take action yourself, you could look for online sources yourself to decide whether or not this person meets our Notability Criteria for living people. The page called WP:BEFORE outlines the steps one should take prior to putting an article forward for deletion. I note there are various sources listed, though the one I did search out (see here) is clearly a self-published gallery catalogue. Maybe others are too, though some of the claims in the article (if true) do suggest he might well be notable. So some further investigation would be helpful, and then perhaps a post at WP:BLP/N could be merited if its still not clear. I hope this helps, and thanks for raising your question here. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:47, 17 November 2021 (UTC) It has now been stripped down to a mere stub, citing three sources. This may look promising, until one realizes that all three are only interviews. (I'm surprised that WP:RS doesn't mention interviews; all that I can find in a hurry is Wikipedia:Interviews, which is merely a somewhat waffly essay.) -- Hoary (talk) 23:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I looked for Fayez Barakat on Google and found his Wikipedia article and numerous Fayez Barakat generated cites. Then I went to newspapers.com and found one article (https://www.newspapers.com/image/148931789/?terms=%22Fayez%20Barakat%22&match=1) about the art dealer allegedly buying stolen items. He does not seem to have much media coverage. Karenthewriter (talk) 01:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you all for your comments and editing! I see that the article now is just about what I would have made it if I had removed the unsourced parts myself rather than ask about it here. The reason I didn't do that was because I thought the article might simply be deleted instead. Reading your comments, it seems to me that the question is whether the interviews now listed as sources are enough to establish notability, and if any other sources can be found. I am skeptical that these interviews are independent enough, and seeing how hard finding other sources appears to be, it doesn't look good. I'll go through the steps in WP:BEFORE and see about starting my first AfD discussion eventually. Knuthove (talk) 14:14, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Interviews themselves are never considered independent, although some published interviews can contain a blurb or other critical commentary that is itself independent. This looks like a decent source. Possibly the Barakat gallery might be more notable than its owner. If the article is kept, there are probably sources to be found about the "looted art" angle (for instance, see here is a blog post about a procedure that Iran won against the gallery, blog post but by a law professor so probably usable for the claim that a trial was held) - my layman understanding after a cursory search is that the gallery makes a decent try to avoid buying art registered as stolen, but will still buy stuff "found" by amateurs which surely encourages dubious collection methods. TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 09:58, 19 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people on that Wikipedia page need to be guided through it?[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 15:35, 18 November 2021 (UTC) The relevant page is List of people from Merseyside. As you can see, ACtiling has made many edits to the page, with good intentions, but many have had to be reverted as they also removed people without any reason, and were misplaced. Any guidance from editors here that can be offered to this enthusiastic editor will, I'm sure, help. Ghmyrtle (talk) 15:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) ACtiling Please read the policy at WP:LISTPEOPLE.--Shantavira|feed me 16:09, 18 November 2021 (UTC) This is no longer necessary because the foundations are all for learning and solving problems. by human guides from problem solving and learning and taking reasonable time and facts without forcing or locking control. that future systems will have to run completely spontaneously according to my schedule. Headings can be just general topics. which, as always, repeats and loops — Preceding unsigned comment added by UFOINDY (talk • contribs) 02:55, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Sumner bio[edit] It's okay with me if you delete the biography I wrote of myself. I am not a "notable" person and don't meet your guidelines. Indiana Author (talk) 19:41, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Indiana Author: The article was proposed for deletion shorty after you created it, but another editor stepped in, deprodded it and tried to improve it. Wikipedia generally tries to discourage people from creating articles about themselves as explained here and here because they often don't realize what it means to have a Wikipedia article written about them. If you're considered to be someone who doesn't meet any of Wikipedia's notability guidelines like WP:GNG, WP:NAUTHOR, or WP:NPROF, then that would be a valid reason for the article to be deleted. If you just want the article to be deleted because you feel you made a mistake in creating it and are concerned it may somehow have real world implications, then you might also be able to request a courtesy deletion. Otherwise, it might be hard to have the article deleted at this point if other editors are actively working on trying to improve it and feel you actually are Wikipedia notable enough to have an article created about you. The best thing to do might be to seek further assistance at Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons/Noticeboard or Wikipedia:Administrators' noticeboard. -- Marchjuly (talk) 22:26, 18 November 2021 (UTC) If you think it should be deleted, see WP:G7. ? Qwerfjkltalk 15:55, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Contributions to Signature[edit] I have seen many who have a contributions section along with their signature. I also want to enable that settings. Can anyone here assist me, on how I can add a contributions tab in my signature?  Itcouldbepossible (talk) 02:52, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Sure – WP:SIG § CustomSig tells you how to customise your signature in preferences (please read the policies and guidelines before trying anything too fancy) and you can link to your contributions using [[Special:Contributions/Itcouldbepossible]]. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 06:13, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh Thanks I will read and do the necessary. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:52, 19 November 2021 (UTC) If a user requests that something is added on a talk page and I (or someone else) has done it, can the request be deleted? Is not, what should be done?[edit] I have noticed some talk pages have sections such as "can x be added to this page?", "y is missing, can it be added?", etc. If I or someone else adds the requested bit of information, what is an acceptable action to take regarding the user's section? I feel that too many redundant and outdated sections can clog up the page, but I'm not sure what is acceptable to do in this case. ReidMoffat (talk) 05:36, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @ReidMoffat: WP:TALK has the general guidelines on talk pages; it's generally better to archive rather than delete discussions or requests that have concluded. Many talk pages are automatically archived by bots; these can be identified by a box at the top of the page indicating that it gets archived. There is also a range of icons that editors use to mark whether a task is done or in progress – {{Done}} shows you the available icons. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 06:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @ReidMoffat: You should find some information in WP:ERREQ and on the documentation page for Template:Request edit about this. The template {{Done}} is OK for many cases, but it's probably better to follow the instructions at Template:Request edit#Response options because of the peculiarities of that particular template's syntax and how edit requests made using it are categorized. Regardless, you shouldn't remove or otherwise modify the posts made by other editors from talk page as pointed out above by ClaudineChionh, except in some certain specific cases like the ones listed in WP:TPO. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:45, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Repeated requests for logins[edit] In the past 30 days, when I enter Wikipedia each day, I notice that I'm not logged in even though each day this appear, I login and check the block "Keep me logged in for 365 days". I'm using a password that was NOT automatically generated by either the Wikipedia software nor by my browser (Chrome). I'm running an iMac under Apple's OSX 10.13.6 and using Google Chrome as a default browser Version 96.0.4664.55 (Official Build) (x86_64) as I have been for several years without this problem. Any suggestions? "What fun would there be if we already knew all there is to know?" 07:39, 19 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by Magillaonfire (talk • contribs) This has been answered at the Help Desk. Magillaonfire, please limit your question to either here or the Help Desk to prevent redundant editor effort. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 08:35, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the not-so-very-helpful reply. I did that hoping that someone in either location would have an answer. Nothing has been changed in either my OS or in my browser settings but I guess I'll just have to take your gentle slap-on-the-nose-with-a-rolled-up-newspaper and go back and check something I've already checked at least twice. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Magillaonfire (talk • contribs) 23:59, 19 November 2021 (UTC) You're welcome. If you still don't get a suitable reply by the time that question is archived, try asking at WP:VPT. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 05:57, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Adding well-referenced negative facts[edit] Hello, I would like to know whether my edits are applicable or not. They are well referenced and I have tried my best to have a neutral tone. Factually, the edits state bad facts, but are rewritten from third-party sources, including major publications like The New York Times. Please vote: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure#Controversies%2FNegative_Facts https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock#Controversies%2FNegative_Facts Centrereded (talk) 09:08, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Centrereded (talk) 09:08, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded I have only checked the second article. When your edit was reverted you were told about WP:BRD and asked to form consensus on the talk page. Instead, you asked there, and here, "What is wrong with my edits?" The answer is that there may or may not be anything wrong with them, but you have been asked to build consensus. So please seek to do that. That does not mean asking what is wrong, it means putting the case for your edits. There is a huge difference. FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 09:20, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded Note, please, This COIN discussion FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 09:23, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @User:Timtrent How do I reach a consensus? I asked people to vote. What's the official way?Centrereded (talk) 10:17, 19 November 2021 (UTC) You started discussions on the Talk pages of those two articles on 19 Nov. For both, you should invite the editors who reverted your repeated attempts to add Controversy sections to the articles, as their Edit summaries were critical of your content and/or referencing. There is no rush. I also have a concern, in that on the Talk pages, you wrote " The words are originally not mine, but from the referenced." Does this mean you are copy/pasting content from the sources? David notMD (talk) 11:25, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded What we are aiming for is a friendly, balanced discussion. Usually, these are informal, with one set fo views holding sway. This builds a simple consensus. We may not agree with a consensus, but we must honour it. If you find that consensus goes against you, and it can, but you feel that your arguments have validity, you can take it further to seek to reach a formal consensus. This is, generally, frowned upon if one has not attempted a simple consensus first. All editors have the right to seek to have their views prevail. No-one of us carries more clout than another of us. One editor equals one opinion, however, consensus is not a ballot, not a beauty pageant. It is the arguments that build consensus, not weight of numbers. Therefore one may ask for an uninvolved editor to "close" any discussion, not necessarily admins. FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 16:42, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Copyright issue[edit] Hi, I am a bit overwhelmed by the huge set of rules on how to report a copyright issue, so I figured I'd just leave it here FYI, and you can do what you will with it. :-) On the German Wikipedia, we have just had to delete a large number of articles by this user. He contributes in at least ten different languages, and his language proficiency in most of these may be doubted. The German articles at least were machine generated, and some of them were barely comprehensible. Since there were only sources given in Azerbaijani language, this was nearly impossible to fix. Now for the copyright issue: The user apparently machine translates snippets from this source and turns them into Wikipedia articles. His necropolis articles at least seem to have evolved that way. The source itself includes a copyright sign and no indication of Creative Commons licensing, so I don't see how this would be public domain material. As the English necropolis articles by this user are nearly identical, I assume that he has used the same method here, maybe - with a little more knowledge of English than German - smoothing things out a little more.  91.34.32.188 (talk) 11:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) FYI - User:Elmar Bax??liyev was indef blocked in 2018 for repeated copyright violations, unblocked in Sept 2021. Since then, has created more than 30 articles in English Wikipedia about archeological sites, some as short as a few sentences with 1-2 refs. The unanswered question is whether EB has returned to copy/translate/paste. David notMD (talk) 11:38, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Definitely. Just throw the appropriate parts from that source into Google Translate, and the result is clear as day. Even though Google Translate does struggle more with the Azerbaijani language than whatever machine this user has been using. --91.34.32.188 (talk) 12:21, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks @91.34.32.188 for bringing this up. If you compare e.g. en:Arat?p? necropolis with az:Arat?p? nekropolu with [1] page 60 Nr. 105 ?r?t?p? n?kr?p?lu its obviously copyvio. I deleted 14 articles of this user in deWP about necropolises as copyright violation from this source. Johannnes89 (talk) 12:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Joe as the admin who unblocked this user -- FYI. --91.34.32.188 (talk) 12:30, 19 November 2021 (UTC) FYI: Elmar Bax??liyev (talk · contribs) indeffed by ToBeFree for copyright violations after a previous indef block for the same issiue. Victor Schmidt (talk) 15:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Maybe someone would care to have a look at the Commons images used by this user, uploaded by another user by the name of Etiunian. I know this is not Commons here, but I have serious doubts as to the copyright situation of those images. Many of them look like scans from books to me. I asked at the Commons "Village pump" about this but didn't get a reply so far. --91.34.32.188 (talk) 21:18, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Why is my Talk Page post in italics?[edit] Hi there, I recently made a new post/section on a Talk Page, and I was wondering why the entire thing is in italics? I tried looking through a few documentation pages, but couldn't seem to find any answers. The post in question is here: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ulrich_Kutschera#Kutschera_2021_article_-_%22Sex_and_Covid-19%22_%28ref._34%29 Thanks for your help! NeuroJasper (talk) 12:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) User:PrincessPersnickety fixed it. David notMD (talk) 13:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi User:NeuroJasper. The post above yours on the talk page used italics, but was missing the code to change it back to normal. Princess Persnickety (talk) 13:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you, User:PrincessPersnickety! I've checked out the revision history to see what you changed, so I can hopefully avoid similar problems in the future. I'll be sure to keep an eye out for angled brackets as one possible cause, the next time I encounter something like this. :) NeuroJasper (talk) 13:09, 19 November 2021 (UTC) You're welcome :) I only know because I encountered the same problem myself a while ago when all my text came out tiny and I couldn't figure out why. Princess Persnickety (talk) 13:13, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Can someone tell me how my draft is looking please?[edit] Hey all, Sorry, first time here and still trying to get used to the Wikipedia layout. May someone please check my recent draft? I've tried to follow all guidelines possible but just want to make sure I'm on the right page. Many thanks Southpointmusic (talk) 15:19, 19 November 2021 (UTC)  Courtesy link: Draft:Southpoint (Record Label) Hi @Southpointmusic! You've successfully submitted your draft, so someone will come along to review it. We have a backlog, so it might take a while, but check back periodically. Cheers, {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 15:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) See your Talk page for explanation for the draft being nominated for Speedy deletion, and the path open to you to appeal the indefinite block of your previous User name. David notMD (talk) 17:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Clarification on dispute resolution[edit] I am headed toward dispute resolution with another editor and, as a relatively new contributor/editor, I want to be clear on the procedure. I had initiated the discussion with him on our individual talk pages because looking at the article talk page there was nothing like a previous us of the page for dispute resolution, nothing much on the page at all. I thought that we could do best talking with each other directly, which we did civilly and thoroughly through the deletion of my original edit, my following his advice in a second edit which was then immed. deleted, etc. ( won't further litigate it here). I see that dispute resolution instructions say "Before making a request here, be sure that the issue has been thoroughly discussed on the article talk page. 3O is only for assistance in resolving disagreements that have come to a standstill." - which this has come to. This has not been on the article talk page, I see no way of productively putting it there at this point. Can I take it to dispute directly from our already existing discussion? I intend to follow the problem to its resolution by a third party or parties. Thank you in advance. Vabookwriter (talk) 15:45, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Vabookwriter (talk) 15:45, 19 November 2021 (UTC) More on dispute question[edit] My confusion is in part because of this kind of inconsistent instruction: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Dispute_resolution There are many methods on Wikipedia for resolving disputes. Most methods are not formal processes and do not involve third-party intervention. Respond to all disputes or grievances, in the first instance, by approaching the editor or editors concerned and explaining which of their edits you object to and why you object. Use the article talk page or their user talk page to do so; be civil, polite, and always assume good faith. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Dispute_resolution_noticeboard/request?withJS=MediaWiki:DRN-wizard.js&withCSS=MediaWiki:DRN-wizard.css Has this issue been discussed extensively on the article talk page? (If you don't know what an article talk page is, answer "Not yet".) Thank you Vabookwriter (talk) 16:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Vabookwriter. Disputes about article content should always be discussed thoroughly on the article talk page before beginning other forms of dispute resolution. Other editors interested in that article will not know what has been said on two editor's talk pages. So, have the conversation in the correct place first before trying anything else. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 16:20, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Vabookwriter, to kick off a new section in the article talk page you can add a statement of the situation so far, and add links to the discussions that are on other pages. That way anyone else coming along to the article can follow the cross-links and see what's been said. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 21:54, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Never mind, in this case it looks like another editor has already copied the discussion text instead of linking to it which is also a valid approach. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 22:02, 20 November 2021 (UTC) New page[edit] how to write a new page . Thanks Lelemera (talk) 16:33, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Follow the instructions here. Polyamorph (talk) 17:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lelemera, and welcome to the Teahouse. I will add something to what Polyamorph said: new editors who try to create encyclopaedia articles before they have learnt how Wikipedia works often have a disappointing and frustrating experience, and end up wasting a lot of their own time, and other people's time. My advice to new editors who want to create an article is to put the idea aside for at least six months while you "learn the craft" of editing Wikipedia, by making small improvements to some of our existing six million articles. --ColinFine (talk) 17:19, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Adminstats[edit] Hello I placed administats Template on my userpage 2days ago still not created by the bot. ? ??? ?????? (talk) 17:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) ? ??? ?????? (talk) 17:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) The bot will not process the template on your userpage because you are not an admin. Polyamorph (talk) 17:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) What to do if wording does not reflect cited source?[edit] What to do if wording does not reflect cited source? I'm trying to help clean up some parts of the feminism article that have been changed/added since it received GA status 10 years ago. The second sentence of the article cites a source which, upon checking, does not say what what was written. It seems (to me) to reflect someone's own opinion rather than the source, and I'm also aware that what's on Wikipedia shouldn't copy verbatim. How should I address this? (I've already posted on the talk page about several issues, though not this one in particular, and have received limited feedback). Pernicious.Editor (talk) 18:11, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Pernicious.Editor: Welcome to the Teahouse. If something appears to be editorial opinion, you can boldly remove it. Alternatively, if you would like readers and interested editors to be aware of the problem, you can add a {{failed verification}} template right after the contentious passage. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 20:10, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Would you like to review my draft on "Autism in China"?[edit] Dear all, My draft article page on "Autism in China": https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Autism_in_China#Diagnosis I am drafting a Wikipedia article on "Autism in China", a topic which I believe has notability and which should have its own article, since there are few attempts to synthesize information on this topic. It is my first time ever writing an article though, so may I ask if someone would like to make suggestions on: 1) Organization (Overview — Epidemiology — History and progress, etc.) 2) Grammar and tense (should I stick with present tense throughout?) 3) Sources and citations 4) I tried to upload a poster image of the movie "Ocean Heaven" to the Media coverage— Ocean Heaven section, but it says I don't have the copyright. What should I do? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ocean-heaven-chinese-movie-poster.jpeg (this is the file link) Thanks in advance!! Ha.susulat (talk) 19:48, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Ha.susulat Welcome to the Teahouse. Firstly, well done on getting as far as you have with a Draft article as a brand new user. That's no mean feat in itself. It's not yet in a form where it could be properly 'reviewed', so I have a mix of general comments which I hope may assist you: Firstly, I looked to see what other 'Autism in ....' article there were, and only found Autism in india, which then redirects one to Global perceptions of autism. I presume you were aware of that article? If not, you should perhaps ensure that that page is up to date in the relevant section, or add a subsection for China. It is always possible to add a 'See main article' link to then take a user to a more detailed page. And that, I assume, is what your draft would cover?. It's important not to add general things into a detailed article which ought to have been covered elsewhere. So just use wikilinks to tie these together. Only explain diagnosis procedures if they are remarkably different from elsewhere. If they are, ensure you use reliable source to demonstrate how those procedures differ. (I did think that section was too lengthy) Forget trying to use images with special non-free image rationales in draft articles. Images can be added later, and have no impact on whether a page reaches our bar for Notability. I have now just appreciated that you asked a very similar question a few days ago (now archived here). I can probably add little to what you were told, especially to seek input from editors at WP:WikiProject Autism. I don't think you are wasting your time with this draft, but there is much work still to do before it could be properly reviewed as an article. Seeking feedback or input into the Draft from more specialist editors is probably the right way to go, yet I don't see you having asked there yet. Finally, and out of interest, are you doing this out of general concern, or for a college project, or in order to raise awareness of specific organisations that you represent? It might be a good idea to introduce yourself on your userpage and explain your interests in editing Wikipedia on this topic. There's further advice at WP:COI for anyone already working inside the autism field to make clear their involvement. That won't stop you editing, but we always aim for openness here. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 20:35, 19 November 2021 (UTC) I remember there's an essay on X about Y and how those articles should only be created when the combination of the two topics is notable. Can't remember though. Sungodtemple (talk) 21:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Stub pages[edit] I know I might be taking on a project that I may regret doing (lol) but here we go. I've noticed a plethora of stub pages, especially regarding early 20th century and late 19th century baseball players. I was curious if there is an exact list of how many of these are stubs. I have plenty of resources (meaning websites and books) where I can flesh out a great number of these pages. Keep in mind I'm focusing on the above target and stub pages for current and former NFL players only. Is there a page I can use as a guide for this rather large task?  Sportsfan1976 I'm only here because I'm not currently somewhere else. (talk) 21:17, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Sportsfan1976. Category: Baseball stubs would be a good place to start. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 21:24, 19 November 2021 (UTC) 7M Pages[edit] About when would Wikipedia reach 7 million pages? We're currently almost at 6.5 million pages, and by the looks of it, Wikipedia looks like it could either reach 7M by early-mid 2022, or late 2022-early2023. How long did it take for Wikipedia to get from 5M to 6M? WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:36, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @WaterflameIsAwesome: Welcome to the teahouse. To date, we've reached 6.4 million articles, and so far I'm thinking we can reach to 7 million articles by mid, late 2022. But if article creation increases rapidly, we can reach 7 million by mid 2022. However, if it goes slow, (which I don't expect) we will reach at this point by 2023. Also, for the 5-6M, we aren't sure about this one. But, if wikipedia was made 19 years ago, (19 divided by 5-6 =3-4) I'm estimating to reach either 3 to 4 years. Severestorm28 (talk) 22:47, 19 November 2021 (UTC) English Wikipedia reached five million articles on 1 November 2015, and six million on 23 January 2020. --bonadea contributions talk 23:09, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Bonadea: That would take 5 years. Severestorm28 (talk) 23:36, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ok, so if we're going at the speed of 5-6 million, then I'm guessing maybe 3 more years? lol. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 00:47, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Severestorm28 that would actually take a little over four years. November 1st of 2015 is closer to January 1st 2016 than same date 2015, so it's a little over four years, rather than a little under five years. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:10, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @WaterflameIsAwesome: That's true. Severestorm28 (talk) 18:56, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Archived URLs[edit] How do I know if a website URL has been archived or not? Kaleeb18 (talk) 23:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Kaleeb18: You could always go to archive.org and search for the URL. In the context of references on Wikipedia, there is a tool to automatically add the archive URL into the citation temple. Go to the "View history" tab on any article and click the "Fix dead links" button to access the tool. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 00:59, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Ganbaruby: Thank you so much I found exactly what I needed; that tool saved me a lot of time and work I would've had to do. Kaleeb18 (talk) 04:35, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Watchlists of other editors[edit] I have learned how to see your own edit counts, and the edit counts of other editors etc. But is it possible to see what is on the watchlists of other editors? Thanks! Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 00:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Th78blue! See Help:Watchlist#Privacy. You can't see the contents of other editors' watchlists, and other editors—including administrators—cannot view the contents of your watchlist. Developers who have access to the servers that hold the Wikipedia database can obtain this information. DanCherek (talk) 00:27, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks! That answered my question! Do I then delete this from the "teahouse" since my question is now answered? Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 00:35, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Great! This thread can be left as is, since it might help other editors who have the same question, and a bot will archive it in a couple days. DanCherek (talk) 00:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) PLEASE ACCEPT MY ARTICLE CREATION I WANT TO MAKE ARTICLE WHO POLITICIAN AND CELEBRATIS PERSON[edit] Hi I'm khogendra Rupini i want to create celebrities Article in Wikipedia and i have a one question why Wikipedia decline my article KhogendrarupiniKdr12 (talk) 01:21, 20 November 2021 (UTC)khogendrarupini See the explanation at User_talk:KhogendrarupiniKdr12. You cannot use Wikipedia for promotion. RudolfRed (talk) 01:23, 20 November 2021 (UTC) And please don't shout. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 02:27, 20 November 2021 (UTC) OP has been blocked as a sockpuppet. --Kinu t/c 03:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @KhogendrarupiniKdr12 please be more mature in your Teahouse questions. Shouting is a big no-no as well. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:08, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How do I know if a page is full?[edit] I thought I was getting proficient with Wikipedia, but lately, my edits have been consistently rejected. Wondering what to do and how to contribute more to pages of my interest. Smcupcake19 (talk) 01:34, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Smcupcake19: Wikipedia is not made of paper, so it doesn't really get "full". However, a brief look at your talk page shows that you have been involved in some long and heated debates about Scrappy-Doo and Draft:Scrappy-Doo Biography. Did you have specific questions about the advice that was given to you on those articles' talk pages, or questions about another aspect of editing Wikipedia? ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 01:47, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, the Scrappy debate was specifically where I wanted feedback. I truly do want to make that page look as good as I can; and I was specifically wondering what kinds of edits would be indubitably welcome, since after initial smooth sailing with my endeavor, as I mentioned above my edits now appear to be quickly deleted, even after making several attempts to compromise. After putting a special amount of effort to keep my most recent edit inoffensive and still finding it quickly deemed unacceptable. I'd just like to know how to make sure my edits can have some reliable permanence; doing so is becoming increasingly elusive.--Smcupcake19 (talk) 04:48, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Talk:Scrappy-Doo makes clear that your efforts on Scrappy-Doo and Draft:Scrappy-Doo Biography have run aground on various issues, including copyright and fancruft. I suggest you read Wikipedia:Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass and some of the links therein. Perhaps, after more than a year at this task, you consider other topics, animated or not. David notMD (talk) 10:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) With all due respect, my path is not singleminded. If there is anything that can be suggest for improving that page that would be acceptable, I'll take it. --Smcupcake19 (talk) 19:50, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Which tag to use for page protect?[edit] Which tag to use for page protect? Coolblack4 (talk) 02:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Coolblack4: You can request page protection at the requests for page protection noticeboard, after you have read the instructions at the top of this page as well as the protection policy. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 02:24, 20 November 2021 (UTC) DS Alert regarding Arab–Israeli conflict[edit] Hi, I have received a DS Alert regarding the Arab–Israeli conflict, but I have made no edits regarding that topic whatsoever. WarKosign who issued the alert previously reverted an edit I made adding Mandaeans to 'See Also' section at the bottom of the Israelites article. I explained to them that scholars see Mandaeans being likely of Judean/Jewish origin and received a DS Alert shortly afterwards regarding the Arab-Israeli conflict. I don't see how the two topics are related. I have left a message on their talk page but have not received a reply. Can you please advise on how to resolve this issue. Thanks. Mcvti (talk) 02:18, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hi @Mcvti! The idea of something being related to the Arab–Israeli conflict is interpreted extremely loosely, so an article like Israelites would probably qualify. DS Alerts, while they might look scary, mean what they say that you haven't done anything wrong, so there's not any issue that you have to worry about resolving. It's just a "heads up, this is a sensitive topic area, so please be cautious". Feel free to carry on editing! Cheers, {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 02:50, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Logo Update Not Appearing in Article[edit] I recently have been updating Major Arena Soccer League and tried to update the league's logo by uploading the logo's .svg as a new version of the existing logo. It seems to work, but the thumbnail of the current logo in the file history and it's representation in the article itself seem to be the old logo. The non-free use rationale and the licensing should be identical as the existing logo, so I'm confused at what I need to do to make the logo on the article update. Logo in question: File:Major Arena Soccer League logo.svg  Packerfan213 (talk) 04:09, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Packerfan213: The logo seems to be appearing in the article now, but a couple of other things for reference. Please don't display non-free content anywhere other than the article namespace per non-free content use criterion #9. If you want to discuss a non-free file, provide a link to it instead as explained here. Please don't overwrite a file like you did in this case except for only minor changes like a size reduction, straightening, minor coloring change, etc. When a logo completely changes like what seems to be the case here, it's better to upload it as a completely new file altogether. Another reason for doing this is related to #3 below. This new version of the logo seems like it might actually not need to be licensed as non-free per c:COM:TOO United States and wordmark. All-text logos tend to be considered too simple for copyright protection in the United States; so, you actually might be able to upload this to Commons instead of Wikipedia under a license of c:Template:PD-textlogo. You might want to ask about this at c:COM:VPC just to make sure, but I think it should be OK for Commons. — Marchjuly (talk) 04:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Marchjuly: Thanks for the quick reply! Is there any way for an admin to delete the file history of the old logo to keep it at just the original then? I'll go to Commons and make a new file upload with the proper licensing info; I made a similar upload for the text based logo of the Milwaukee Wave. Packerfan213 (talk) 04:43, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Just revert back to the original version and add {{furd}} to the top of the file's page. The will mark the unused revisions of the file for speedy deletion per WP:F5. — Marchjuly (talk) 04:58, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks again! Sorry for making a mess out of that file's history, but everything should be sorted now I hope. Packerfan213 (talk) 05:10, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hey, I need help...[edit]  User98207252129 (talk) 05:13, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hey, I have a question, where can I report a Vandalism I saw in an article from Sinterklaas? If you go to this link and see the left side of the revision. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sinterklaas&type=revision&diff=1056159685&oldid=1056159438 by 184.16.185.34 (talk+ · tag · contribs · filter log · WHOIS · RBLs · proxy check · block user · block log · cross-wiki contribs · CheckUser (log)), Thanks! @User98207252129: nothing to worry about. As evident from the Difflink you gave above, the edit has already been reverted by Acroterion. See Wikipedia:Vandalism to learn more about vandalism and how to combat it. Please be aaware that not everything unconstructive is nessesary vandalism. Victor Schmidt (talk) 06:34, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Make sense. Thank you for your response! — Preceding unsigned comment added by User98207252129 (talk • contribs) 07:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How to cite this[edit] I want to cite the management plan for the Hidden Christian Sites in the Nagasaki Region world heritage site. It can be found here however it doesn't open the management plan just the link to open it, how can I cite the file directly, Thank You. Tai123.123 (talk) 06:32, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Tai123.123: Instead of linking the listing, you can use the document URL instead, which appears to be https://whc.unesco.org/document/160504. A cite to this would look something like this:[1]. When citing a PDF as large as this, please do not forget specifying the page number. Victor Schmidt (talk) 06:45, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Tai123.123: I've tweaked Victor Schmidt's example above to include the year of publication and an example page number for you. I agree that a 351 page document, 191Mbyte download is far too large to use as a supporting citation without giving a page number. Because it is likely that such an extensive reference might be used multiple times throughout the document, I've used the REFNAME feature to give it a name so that you can call up the citation two or more times without having to re-enter the details. Thus, five uses of that source across a long article would link to just one entry in the 'References' section, which is much tidier than repeating it five times. Your can use the {{rp}} template to insert the exact page number after each use of the reference. Thus: Hidden Christians passed on their faith from one generation to the next.[1]:?23? Most elements are found along coastal areas and remote islands.[1]:?86? Plans have been prepared to build renewable energy facilities in both the suburbs and on some of the remote islands. This will include solar, tidal and wind energy generation.[1]:?265? I hope you might find that useful. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:52, 20 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ a b c d "Comprehensive Preservation and Management Plan - Hidden Christian Sites in the Nagasaki Region" (pdf). Unesco World Heritage Centre. 2017. p. 350-351. Retrieved 2021-11-20. Need Help[edit] I really need help finding the real names of two esports players in the 2019 MotoGP eSports Championship. There gamertags are XxBoMbeR_45xX and Rllorca. If you ever find their names include them in this page: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2019_MotoGP_eSports_Championship MickeyD's234 (talk) 07:58, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @MickeyD's234 I have moved the page you created to Draft space as it is uncited and probably not notable. I suggest you focus on addressing that, rather than worrying about the real persona of two video gamers. You should submit it through Articles for Creation process when it eventually is. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I keep getting "you need consensus" but when i reply i get no response back.[edit] I keep getting "you need consensus" but when i reply i get no response back. what does it means and why aren't those who post this answering me? I wish to include a solar time-lapse on the "sun" article. can be viewed here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XBmLER08Ryw Daviddayag (talk) 11:03, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I see the issue at Talk:Sun, I think the responder (ScottishFinnishRadish) to your edit request wanted more information about where you want the image placed in the article, what you want as the image caption, why is the image needed? They also wanted to see if you can get input from other users to make sure the image is suitable for inclusion in the featured article Sun (one of wikipedia's highest quality articles). It is better to open a new discussion at Talk:Sun, outline your case for including the image, and see if any regular editors there agree. If so then either they can help you to add the image or you can submit a new edit request. If you have trouble finding someone to respond (perhaps not many people are watching that page), you can try asking at the astronomy wikiproject here: Wikipedia_talk:WikiProject_Astronomy. Polyamorph (talk) 11:26, 20 November 2021 (UTC) It would be more appropriate in the sunspot article, but there are already several good videos there. Also, you have already been told that you should not be adding links to your own YouTube channel.--Shantavira|feed me 11:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Sun - arcs of plasma They're not adding links to their youtube channel, they have uploaded the video to commons. Polyamorph (talk) 12:03, 20 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Hello @Daviddayag, and welcome to the Teahouse. I can see you've taken and already uploaded to Commons some pretty cool images, and I'm sorry you felt you'd hit a brick wall. I can see why, though it's really down to a simple misunderstanding I think. You made a 'protected page edit request' and were asked to get consensus to add it. The reason for that was that the editor who responded to your edit request would not necessarily have been one experienced in the article, so they advised you to seek CONSENSUS. Unfortunately, I don't think you appreciated that you were expected to initiate that discussion yourself, and that's why nothing has happened, thus far. My advice is to start a new section at Talk:Sun, headed something like 'Proposal to add plasma arc'. Then embed the image as I've done here, with the caption you would propose to use (it doesn't have to be the default one you see here). Most importantly, explain your rationale for inserting it. Would it replace an existing image, to which section would it go in, what textual statement would it support. Sign it and then wait for comments. Then, if there is no response after a week or so, you could be justified to WP:BEBOLD and add it yourself. If the majority view of responders is that it would be a bad idea, then you could discuss further, but eventually be prepared to accept that consensus is against you. Having 'been bold' it's possible your addition might be immediately reverted, and then you can start a discussion on the merits of having yet another image in that article. Now, when I started this, I assumed you did not have the 'auto-confirmed' status to edit semi-protected articles, but you do. So, the choice is yours whether to be bold and simply add it, or start that discussion first. I strongly advise the latter course, and I hope my response has given you a path forward and not discouraged you in any way. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 11:48, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Daviddayag You have exhibited a pattern of adding your own telescope photos to articles when perhaps one more image is not useful, and worse, inserting your name and other unnecessary information in the image captions. Please return to the articles and remove your name. David notMD (talk) 12:27, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Agree with this, you shouldn't add your name to image captions - it is already credited in commons where you uploaded the file. Polyamorph (talk) 12:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Good spot. I've now removed the credit from two articles as it's easily findable in the Commons link, and goes against our policies for crediting pictures within articles. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:58, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Reliable sources[edit] Hi, I'm new to all this, and trying to write an article about a social media personality and youtuber. For this type of article, the usual obvious reliable sources like journal articles and books are few and far between. I have tried to use the best quality sources I can find, like published articles. However, sometimes there is no independent secondary source, so I was wondering: Is using the primary source acceptable (e.g. the YouTube video I refer to, or the about page that states the view count of a channel)? If so, should it be cited as a source or linked to in some other way? Twdavies (talk) 13:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Not for notability, and YouTube, as a rule, is a very dodgy source in the first place. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 13:44, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Twdavies Welcome to the Teahouse. Unfortunately, as was hinted at above, our Notability criteria means that we ignore views or follower counts on YouTube as a measure of notability. We focus instead on whether independent media or other reliable sources have written about that person in detail and in depth. Unless those sources are available, it's unlikely that there would be any article accepted about them. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 14:13, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for your reply, I was thinking more in terms of whether a source is reliable as a source of information, rather than whether it is adequate to demonstrate notability. I believe I have some other sources for other parts of the article that show some level of notability, whether or not it is enough is another issue that I will tackle separately if need be. So the views and follower count were just included as pieces of information, rather than as evidence of notability. I have also found, in the link to the reliable sources page above "For example, even extremely low-quality sources, such as social media, may sometimes be used as self-published sources for routine information about the subjects themselves." And I believe this answers my question of whether some of my sources are adequate. If I am mistaken, please let me know. Twdavies (talk) 14:32, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Twdavies No, I think you're right. I'm sorry I didn't quite appreciate what you're asking. We generally trust the person's own SM feeds on trivia, but not on key factual statements about them. Thus, we gave TV presenter, Chris Packham's, birth date based upon one of his Facebook posts, if I remember correctly. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 14:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for your help Twdavies (talk) 14:54, 20 November 2021 (UTC) As the declining AfC reviewer, the user reached out to me on my talk page, here was my response: Youtube/Reddit/Twitter/Twitch - Most social media stuff is going to be considered unreliable (even if it came directly from the person's mouth, unfortunately). With user-generated content, anyone can say they are a big deal or make outlandish claims and give no information to back it up. Additionally, sites like that are often filled with people who are self-promotional and using those promotional sources in an article to try and paint a good PR picture about themselves on Wikipedia. Apple Podcasts/Spotify, etc. - These sources just show that the podcast exists. They don't really tell us anything about the subject. If they do, it is often written by the host themselves, and that brings us back to the user-generated content situation above. At its core, Wikipedia is a bunch of nerds, and so the site still looks at sources like you would use for an essay in school (newspapers, TV, reputable websites, etc.) For example, let's look at Gus' Wikipedia article (Just because Gus has one and not Eddy does not automatically mean that Eddy should have one, BTW. See WP:OSE): there are definitely some similar issues with the sources there, but Gus also has coverage from the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel and the Burnett County Sentinel. (Note that Gus' article doesn't mention his recent controversies, which is talked about on the talk page for the article. Basically, they can't find a reliable source that gives a shit about Youtube Drama. In closing, I want to thank you for wanting to put a good article together. Making articles for YouTubers is super difficult, because the guidelines of who is notable enough are not well understood. For more information on reliable sources, you can look at Wikipedia:Reliable sources or at one of my favorite lists on the site Wikipedia:Reliable sources/Perennial sources, which looks at many well-known sources and whether or not Wikipedia would consider them reliable. Happy editing! Bkissin (talk) 18:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) SUGGESTION(actually): A small idea for improved understanding....[edit] I don't want to spend a bunch of time one this, as I'm virtually certain it will be wasted... HOWEVER, having said that, hopefully it will make it to someone that knows how to use Wikipedia, and is willing and enthusiastic about navigating through the warren of minutia to make it a slightly better tool over time for everyone. I was reading an article here (which I occasionally do), as this seems to be a helpful tool for the most part, AND... I noticed when reading the following excerpt (keeping in mind, this suggestion has ABSOLUTELY ZERO TO DO WITH THE SUBJECT MATTER): QUOTE: "On 19 August 1958, a West Berlin court fined the former xxxxxxxxxx leader 35,000 marks (approximately £3,000, or US$8,300) (equivalent to €81,248 in 2017)," OBSERVATIONS: =======[edit] 1) You'll notice the author of that statement went to some considerable length to try and enhance the understanding of the reader, by taking an otherwise objective monetary value and translating it for the reader into a currency the reader was likely to understand, AND.... adjusting it for inflation so the reader would have some idea as to the relative value/scope of the amount of money that is being referenced. 2) GREAT! The point of any encyclopaedia is to increase the understanding of things for actual human beings. LOVE IT! 3) This method of translating a continually shifting value (virtually no currency's value stays the same over time, ever! Right?) is not unique, it is often used here and in other places that I'm aware of, to help readers understand a relative amount of currency/money/wealth over time. Often I've seen historical values expressed as "a year's worth of wages in today's money" for example. Very useful in producing human understanding by comparison within a contemporary context, and one with which almost every human being on the planet can relate! 4) If you'll notice, the quoted excerpt mentions "2017". Well, that is a couple years old already and time (in so far as I know) is not going to stop, it's going to keep going, and going, and going, and going... AND... that number including what it means/represents is going to continue to slip further, and further, and further away from it's once accurate translation??!?!? It's not going to get MORE ACCURATE, it's going to continually get less accurate, defeating the whole purpose for which it was intended, understanding it's relative value. 5) Since it would not be very efficient to go back and adjust every one of the attempts to create monetary translations that make sense, by manually recalculating them and adjusting them for inflation periodically, and almost impossible to do considering the number of pages and locations where the technique is used over Wikipedia, it occurred to me that there really ought to be a better way. SUGGESTION: =====[edit] (AND,... sorry it took so long to get here, BTW) WHY NOT CREATE SOME SORT OF PROGRAMMABLE, INLINE, WIDGET YOUR WRITER/EDITOR COMMUNITY COULD DEPLOY THAT WOULD CONSTANTLY SHOW THE READER, WHAT THAT ORIGINAL VALUE IS WORTH TODAY, RIGHT NOW... AT THE TIME OF PULLING THE PAGE? Computers are GREAT at repetitious calculation that would put humans to sleep! This looks to me like a perfect use of the kind of things computer excel at, and would benefit the readers and the writers a great deal, I would think. If you can have a little widget that translates the definition of words inline, so... the reader can hover and get the definition of a word, or the relevance of a name, or... whatever the editor thinks could use enhanced understanding, why not have the same kind of widget for historical monetary translation and adjustment? Inputs: Historical Amount(i.e the original number), Historical date being referenced, and Original Currency. Calculation: Depending on the Historical date/era.... reference the correct table(dataset), probably Gold or CPI. "Boil" the Inputs down to an objective, un-adjusted universal value. Read in the language of the user's browser to get the correct currency with which the user is likely to be familiar. Output: Take the objective, un-adjusted universal value and adjust it for inflation. Convert the adjusted value to the currency likely used by the reader based on the language lookup. Present the relevant number in the Hover. (AND... it's obviously going to be more complex than that. The point here is that it is doable with some effort, enthusiasm, and concern for the reading audience.) Thanks for any time and effort expended on behalf of the reading public. DoNotShootAtMe (talk) 15:51, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, welcome to the teahouse. I apologise, initially I thought this was spam, thanks to Theroadislong for letting me know it wasn't. What you are describing sounds very similar to a template that already exists described here: Template:To USD. Similar templates exist for other currencies, e.g. Template:To EUR. Polyamorph (talk) 19:13, 20 November 2021 (UTC) See also Template:Inflation, Template:FXConvert and related templates listed there. Nick Moyes (talk) 19:20, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Also note that the article that was originally quoted seems to be Artur Axmann, and the line in question does not have the converted value €81,248 hardcoded in the source; it already uses the {{Inflation}} template to convert 35,000 marks in 1958 to current Euros. If you edit the page you will see that it says {{Inflation|DE|35000|1958|fmt=eq|cursign=€}}. So this will automatically adjust for inflation as time goes by. CodeTalker (talk) 19:48, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Rootsweb.org/shelby does NOT exist - replaced with https://algenweb.org/shelby[edit] How do I remove the old rootsweb.org/shelby from Wikipedia and add the new and correct link replacement https://algenweb.org/shelby ... they are sometimes listed in outside related links and/or links on Wikipedia. Thank you. Bjseales (talk) 16:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Bjseales: When asking for assistance, it's helpful to mention the name of the Wikipedia article you're referring to. Your three attempts to include yourself in the Thompson High School article have been reverted. "Notable alumni" sections include people who meet Wikipedia's definition of notability and Wikipedia articles exist about them. It is not a place to list everyone who graduated from the school. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 16:40, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Users only edits are to add spam links to their own websites. Theroadislong (talk) 17:55, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-redirect-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a redirect that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A redirect you created, {{{1}}}, which redirected to [[{{{2}}}]], was under discussion, and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a redirect fits our redirect guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) see question above. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:23, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Rows and Columns[edit] Hey guys! How do you edit rows and columns to Wikitables in the source editor? I screwed up trying to do this and had to use the visual editor. Thanks! BubbaDaAmogus (talk) 18:28, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @BubbaDaAmogus Tables are fiendishly hard. Help:Introduction to tables with Wiki Markup/1 is a good place to start. Use your sandbox and play FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 18:31, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @BubbaDaAmogus I think Visual Editor's only really useful feature is its handling of adding rows, columns and data into tables. Far better than source editor for small tables - though I've never used it on really big stuff. I'd stick with VE to begin with. Otherwise, tables certainly are 'fiendish', and I always copy existing wikimarkup into my sandbox and attempt to edit it there. Only once I'm successful do I paste it in to a live article. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Ok, guess I can save myself some thinking and stamina there! Thanks!BubbaDaAmogus (talk) 02:04, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Request for feedback on draft of article[edit] Hi, I have recently started editing Wikipedia and I noticed a red link for Sisir Kana Dhar Chowdhury. I made a draft here and I tagged some projects that looked relevant but I have not received any feedback yet. I wanted to know if I had done something wrong with the tagging or if there is anything I missed while marking the draft as needing approval. Also, some feedback would be appreciated, since it is the first article I have written. Autumn astronomer (talk) 19:31, 20 November 2021 (UTC) "Review waiting, please be patient. This may take 2 months or more, since drafts are reviewed in no specific order. There are 2,468 pending submissions waiting for review." David notMD (talk) 20:19, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How do I remove a picture from my sandbox?[edit]  Kabkabkab (talk) 19:46, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Using Visual Editor, tap/click on the image to select it, and instead of hitting the Edit button in the pop-up, press backspace or delete on your keyboard. (There is no visual affordance for deleting the image that I can see.) Hope that helps! ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:30, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Can I add another editor for my own sandbox?[edit]  Kabkabkab (talk) 19:46, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Kabkabkab! Anyone has the ability to edit your sandbox, it's just a social convention that we don't. (Except to address issues like copyright problems and so on.) ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:17, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Kabkabkab User:Kabkabkab/sandbox Declined 11-20 and resubmitted with only a minor change that did not address the reviewer's comments. Unless you and/or someone else improves it, will be declined again. Minimally, delete Variations, Other recipes and Virals sections. David notMD (talk) 20:24, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I feel that the History, International Distribution, and Marketing sections have promise. Drop value judgements like "delicious" and "succeed ... perfectly". The short description should be changed from "Famous Thai Instant Noodle" to something like "Brand of instant noodles". If you are employed by or contracted to the company, you will need to declare that (see WP:COI and WP:PAID). We get both Wai Wai and Mama brands here in Australia, so as a reader I find some relevance in the nascent article. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 21:21, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Trying to create a list of beastars characters article.[edit] Hi there. I need help submitting an article about list of beastars characters. Garfield Cat & Lasagna (talk) 21:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy: Draft:List of Beastars Characters. Declined once. Beastars exists as an article and includes a list of main characters. David notMD (talk) 22:34, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Garfield Cat & Lasagna I'm sorry, but you've sourced that page to the exisiting article, and none of the characters are deemed as notable in their own right. So, as List articles are there to list notable topics, this draft is a non-starter at this time. Nick Moyes (talk) 23:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Question[edit] what is the one question you would ask the universe? 87.115.124.185 (talk) 23:08, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Welcome to the Teahouse, IP user. This is a help forum for folks encountering difficulties editing Wikipedia. It is not a chat forum. So your question is off-topic and not appropriate here, nor, indeed, anywhere else. That's what social media is best used for. Thank you. Nick Moyes (talk) 23:54, 20 November 2021 (UTC) List formatting[edit] Is there any way to make List1 below have the same formatting (centered, numbers aligned) as List2, which uses the standard # syntax? List1 List2 1. D. Budge =2. W. Sabin =2. B. Riggs 4. F.Kovacs 5. F. Perry 6. D. Skeen =7. B. Barnes =7. W. Van Horn D. Budge B. Riggs W. Sabin F. Kovacs B. Barnes J. Nogrady R. Harman H. Peterson Thanks, Sod25 (talk) 23:19, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Sod2500: Welcome to the Teahouse. Your 'equals' signs push the text over to the right, so my not especially elegant solution would be to add two non-breaking spaces to the beginning of each line without an equals sign to 'pad out' the space, and then to left-align the text. You can use the template {{nbsp}} to add a single space. But, without making a table with position numbers in one column, flag icon and name in another, I can't see a better solution. But maybe someone else can. List1 List2   1. D. Budge =2. W. Sabin =2. B. Riggs   4. F.Kovacs   5. F. Perry   6. D. Skeen =7. B. Barnes =7. W. Van Horn D. Budge B. Riggs W. Sabin F. Kovacs B. Barnes J. Nogrady R. Harman H. Peterson Hope you find this helpful, Nick Moyes (talk) 23:50, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The article that I want to create already has a draft.[edit] The article that I want to create already has a draft. What should I do? Happykrcheese (talk) 00:28, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Happykrcheese Welcome to the Teahouse. You did not say what the draft is, unfortunately. It's not Draft:Countryballs Show - Into Space by any chance, is it? When a draft already exists, it's a good idea to approach the editor already working on it and ask to collaborate with them. There's no point two people creating two drafts on the same subject. In the case of the draft I linked to above, it hasn't been touched since June, contains no content, and will probably be deleted soon. So there'd be no problem you working on it. It's always important to ensure you have good sources to work from, and also that the topic will meet our Notability Criteria. Hope this helps, Nick Moyes (talk) 00:38, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Please help review me for "Jaymark_215![edit] Can you please review for contributions? Smalemon (talk) 01:23, 21 November 2021 (UTC) User:"Jaymark 215 appears to have made close to 300 contributions since creating an account on 7 Nov 2021. Do you have a specific question? David notMD (talk) 03:27, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Possible sockpuppetry or meat farm? "Jaymark 215 has a history of editing several Pasay election results article that are also edited by user:JKLlamera and at least six IP addresses that start with 223.25.63. (83, 162, 101, etc.) as single purpose accounts. David notMD (talk) 03:40, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Example: 2013 Pasay local elections. David notMD (talk) 09:29, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Such IP's geolocate to the area of the Phillipines that includes Pasay. It's not surprising in itself that most of the people interested in editing an article about Pasay's local elections would come from that area, nor perhaps that some of them have little interest in editing anything else. I'm not saying that sockpuppetry isn't happening, but this seems to me to be, in isolation, weak evidence for it. {The poster formerly known as 87.81.230.195} 90.205.225.31 (talk) 19:39, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Article name problem[edit] I recently moved an article to change its name but the article does not show up on the Wikipedia search box when I type in its new name. Can someone tell me why this is happening and how I can fix it? Person077777777 (talk) 03:53, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Person077777777: Did you type in Competitive Pokémon Battling? It must be exactly the same as this. I guess you didn't use the "accented e"? If so, you can fix the problem by creating a redirect page named Competitive Pokemon Battling --Dragoniez (talk) 06:38, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How do you use gadgets on other languages' Wikipedias?[edit] Hi, I'm from the Japanese Wikipedia, and I'm looking for a way to import the strikethrough-blocked-users gadget (jawp doesn't have a setting for this in the preferences). I guess this is a matter of CSS, but I have no idea where I can find the original script. I would appreciate any help. -- Dragoniez (talk) 06:32, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dragoniez: Special:Gadgets lists the gadgets installed in a wiki. The source for this one is at MediaWiki:Gadget-markblocked.js, and it has instructions for importing it into another wiki by adding the code in lines 3 and 4 to your common.js in jawp. I haven't tried this, though. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 06:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh: Thanks a lot! It worked like a charm. --Dragoniez (talk) 06:58, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dragoniez: Oh, good to know! ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) What are the templates for "Year of the tiger" and "This user likes cats".[edit] I would like to add two userboxes to my page. So, I would like to know what the templates are for: • This User was born in the Year of the Tiger. • This User likes cats. ArtFlow29 (J.) (talk) 07:09, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @ArtFlow29 (J.) Welcome to the Teahouse. The templates you refer to are called userboxes. You can look through hundreds of them at Wikipedia:Userboxes/Galleries. They go on your userpage. But, at present, you have such a ridiculously huge image on your userpage that adding anything else would be pointless until you fix that - perhaps by inserting a |thumb| parameter. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 14:18, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for your very kind help! ArtFlow29 (J.) (talk) 19:50, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Is therese sources sufficient for an article?[edit] Hello, I am writing an article about a games studio. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Midoki) I searched on the internet and found these sources: http://midoki.com/ https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-32145285 Is these sources enough for this article? ;p7ti (talk) 08:16, 21 November 2021 (UTC) ;p7ti Hello and welcome. The website of the studio would be a primary source and not acceptable for establishing notability.(though it might be for some other things) The BBC source seems to be at least partially based on an interview with the founder of the company, though there might be some content there that could be used in an article. If you are submitting your draft for review, most reviewers look for at least three reliable sources with significant coverage. 331dot (talk) 08:21, 21 November 2021 (UTC) At least three reliable indepedendent sources with significant coverage, ;p7ti. In my experience that's often the bit that people miss. "But surely [newspaper] is reliable?" "Yes, but if their article is mostly based on an interview or a press release, it's not independent, and doesn't contribute to notability". --ColinFine (talk) 09:58, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Official name for Malaysia language[edit] Why Wikipedia use unofficial name for Malaysia ?. "Malaysian" is not official name, you can see Malaysia articles 152  Malayan Law (talk) 11:27, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia uses the title most commonly used in English language sources, see WP:COMMONNAME. --David Biddulph (talk) 11:41, 21 November 2021 (UTC) HELP[edit] Can somebody please help me with my biography? I honestly don't know where to start, is there a questionnaire or an outline I can start with or work off of? Officialbosscuz (talk) 11:30, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Officialbosscuz (talk) 11:30, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Officialbosscuz Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Thanks for asking. Wikipedia is not a place for people to tell the world about themselves. Please read the autobiography policy. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about the person, showing how they meet Wikipedia's special definition of a notable person. It won't necessarily say what the subject wants it to say, and in fact most articles are typically written without any involvement from the subject. A Wikipedia article is not necessarily desirable, there are good reasons to not want one. If you meet the definition of a notable person, someone will eventually take note of you and choose to write about you. I would suggest that you allow that to play out and go on with your life and career. 331dot (talk) 11:41, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Officialbosscuz, if you prefer not to take 331dot's excellent advice, then at least create the draft in your "sandbox". (You've started it in your user page, which isn't for this purpose.) However, it's better just to do what 331dot says. -- Hoary (talk) 12:42, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Notability (music) describes how musicians qualify as notable. Many think they are notable, but WP:TOOSOON turns out to be true. David notMD (talk) 14:04, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Addition of sources to Myles Moylan page[edit] I would like to add two sources to Myles Moylan's Wiki page to support the fact that he was born in Tuam, Co Galway. "The Moylans of Tuam". JOTS (18): 42–55. Retrieved 17 November 2021. which traces the life and career of two Tuam men Myles Moylan and his nephew Bro Michael Titus Moylan (Superior General of the Christian Brothers (1900 - 1905) was published in the Journal of the Old Tuam Society (#18) last week. I would like to use this secondary source to support the fact that Myles was born in Tuam rather than Amesbury. I would also like to attach Myles Moylan's Findagrave page as a reference to his Tuam birth - "Myles Molan". Findgrave. Retrieved 21 November 2021. His Findagrave reference was cited before but was later deleted. For anybody who is researching Myles, it contains some primary records (which I know Wiki frowns upon) and also connections to his parents, some of his siblings and his nephew. Is there somebody out there who can oblige me and add those sources for me, please? BuffyO'B (talk) 13:26, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @BuffyO'B: Welcome to the teahouse. You can add sources using the "ref" tool near the bottom of the editing page you want to edit, and the ref tool should pop up on the screen, and then cite your web by citing: Empty citation (help) (filling the blanks in the editing page.) Also, if this does not help, you can also visit: Wikipedia:Tutorial (historical)/Citing sources. Severestorm28 (talk) 15:25, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Find-A-Grave not accepted as a reliable source reference because anyone can change content without editorial oversite. Can you find a published obituary? David notMD (talk) 17:58, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How can I contribute to Wikipedia page[edit]  Sunday Ezekiel ayiyi (talk) 14:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Welcome to the Teahouse, @Sunday Ezekiel ayiyi. You might wish to read Wikipedia:Contributing to Wikipedia and perhaps also try out our interactive tour called The Wikipedia Adventure. But I sense your frustration is that your receiving warnings about adding information that you have personally researched or studied, but which has not been formally published. The best way is to consider that Wikipedia is merely an encyclopaedia which collates and compiles information that has already been reliably published, then only that information should be added - not the details that you personally know, but which can't be checked up on by someone with access to a library or the internet on the other side of the world. We don't accept Original Research until it has been written about by others in independent sources such as books or periodicals. It is often best to learn how to contribute here by making small changes and improvements to articles first, before attempting major improvements. Starting with articles that you are not an expert in, or have strong views on, is by far the most sensible way to learn our ways. Because this is a collaborative project, we are all used to both being challenged as to why we've made some change, and also challenging others (always politely, of course). We work by consensus, so you might find making suggestions for big improvements or additions to an article are best made on that article's talk page, or you can directly ask an editor on their talk page why they decided something you added was not OK with them - and vice versa, of course. I hope this helps and that you aren't too put off at the start of your own Wikipedia Adventure. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 14:29, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Mikhail Kozlov (politician)[edit] Hi, I have recently created an article on a Russian politician that a user moved that page to a draft, which they might have a justified reason for the article to be moved in to a draft. I have added additional sources to that article to clear that submission into the main space. However, I am unable to submit it, because either a user did not add a submission button or there seemed to be a glitch. Can you find a way to fix that problem? Thanks. Ivan Milenin (talk) 14:26, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Ivan Milenin Welcome to the Teahouse. I'm sorry you had that problem, which I've now fixed for you. By editing and then adding "{{AfC submission/draft}}" to the top of the page, and then saving the edit, you get a Draft notice and a nice blue button to hit when you're ready to submit your article for review. Nick Moyes (talk) 14:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the help, always appreciated. Ivan Milenin (talk) 14:37, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to upload the logo for a walking trail[edit] Am a newcomer and have barely discovered how to edit text. Where will I discover how to upload an image so as to amend incorrect info in an entry please? Also, how do I key one tilde, let alone four, on a Mac keyboard please? Speysideway (talk) 16:05, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Speysideway and welcome to the Teahouse and to Wikipedia. It can be a bit tricky to start with to understand all the ins and outs of editing and following all our various policies and guidelines. (A bit like setting out on a mountain walk and not being able to find your way though the bl***y farmyard). So, I've left you one of our welcome messages with a few helpful links to get you navigating in the right direction. Now, regarding image uploads: whilst we normally advise images to be uploaded and released under an appropriate licence to Wikimedia Commons, I don't think that's advisable with a company logo or brand image, as the release permits commercial use of that logo by anyone else. So, instead, I'd advise taking a very low resolution version of that file and uploading it only to English Wikipedia (not Wikimedia Commons) under a non-free use licence. I've never actually done that myself, though I can point you to read more at Wikipedia:Non-free use rationale guideline. If, however, you simply want to replace an old image with a new one, such as File:Speyside Way logo.jpg, it should be even simpler! Simply scroll down that page to the bottom of the 'File History' section and click 'Upload a new version of this file'. There you can supply an up-to-date version fo the file (providing it is a very low resolution version). Regarding typing keyboard tildes: Typing four of them (~~~~) used to be the only way you could get your signature stamp inserted into the end of a post. However, providing you click the 'Reply' link to posts (rather than edit) - a very recent introduction to English Wikipedia - the software automatically signs and dates the post for you, so you don't have to bother. But a Google search fund me this which might help elsewhere. Finally, I do need to highlight one issue I see - and that's your username. Unfortunately, you might have unintentionally breached one of our policies of one person -one account. We don't really like seeing usernames which could suggest shared use of one logged in account, or one that represents and promotes an organisation or website (such as www.speysideway.co.uk). A better choice would have been something like SpeysidewayIan/Speyside Rambler etc etc. Not to worry immediately, but I'll drop by your userpage and let you know how to deal with that one. If you are connected with the Moray government's website, we'll also ask you to declare your connection to it on your userpage. We call that a Conflict of interest. We don't mind if you do work for them - we just need openness in declaring any WP:COI or WP:PAID connection before making more edits. I hope this is of some assistance to you. As an outdoors person myself, I'd be happy to help and encourage you to learn how to edit if you run into further difficulties. So feel free to contact me via my Talk page if you need a helping hand to get you going. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:37, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to hyperlink Wikipedia to other wiki sites[edit] I have a problem regarding linking of https://antwiki.org/wiki/Ophthalmopone_berthoudi. The Wiki says I have to write something like Ophthalmopone_berthoudi. But as you can see, the other wiki says the link does not exist. But if I do / Ophthalmopone_berthoudi then it works, but the text is messed up. Please read my source code to completely understand my question. Thanks in advance Imnotpathetic (talk) 16:21, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Imnotpathetic Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. I did look at a lot of your edits to Gamergate (ant) and I'm afraid you've made a couple of errors in your approach. So forgive me if I take the time to correct you so you don't do it again. Firstly, it would not be acceptable under any circumstances to link to a non-Wikimedia Foundation project via an external link in any article text. Such links to other wikis might be acceptable if used as part of a citation, and where that wiki was managed and maintained by an institution or repute. Most wikis are user-generated so not regarded as reliable as sources. Possibly a link in 'Further reading' or 'External links' might be justified, but I don't think the article even justifies that. Secondly, I noticed you have made lots of edits to that page removing redlinks to various species of ants in the article. This would only make sense if the name was linked two or more times. Every species on this earth is regarded as notable (see WP:SPECIESOUTCOMES), and so a redlink is quite appropriate. It will turn blue once a page for that taxon has been created which, I'm sure you appreciate, is useful. Not only does it currently flag up and encourage someone to write an article on that taxon, but it also then links to it once it's made. So I see no reason for either stripping out redlinks or adding external links as you wanted to. I hope this makes sense. regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 17:55, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I am truly sorry for the mess I made and thank you for reverting all that mess. But just say, I need to link to a External Link then how do I do it if the site does not work because it has a extra "/" in the URL? Is in not possible to link Wikipedia with such links? Thanks in advance. Imnotpathetic (talk) 19:24, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to add a reference text[edit] I have information on the the exact birth date of Joseph Otto Kesselring, I'm trying to add this in the reference area, and I've tried several ways none have worked. How do I add a reference? Gdwright (talk) 16:35, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Gdwright. Please see Help:Referencing for beginners.--Shantavira|feed me 17:34, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to edit the references[edit] Good morning I'm new and I'm learning now to edit here and I have a question how I can make a reference page that complies with the policies, try to make one here https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Alberto_Sosa and the I had done wrong, then I made the modifications and I would like if it is not a bother that they help me to learn and be able to continue in this world that I like a lot Seiyukaras (talk) 16:42, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Seiyukaras. The help I'm going to give you is the advice that I regularly give new editors who try straight away to do the most difficult thing there is in editing Wikipedia: creating a new article (would you try to build a house as your first ever building project? Would you play a solo recital after your first ever violin lesson?) My advice is to put aside that project for at least six months while you "learn the trade" of editing Wikipedia by making improvements to some of our existing six million articles. In the meantime you should read your first article, and also notability and referencing for beginners. I have some concerns about the image. You uploaded File:Alberto Sosa.jpg, claiming the author as Alberto Sosa and claiming it as your own work. Are you the photographer? If not, how are you claiming it as "own work"? If you are not the photographer (or somehow the copyright holder) then you are probably violating the photographer's copyright by purporting to grant an irrevocable licence to anybody in the world to copy, reuse, or modify that picture without requiring payment or permission, as long as they attribute its source (that is a summary of what you have done in uploading it). If you are the copyright holder, then you can legally do that, but is it what you intended? Furthermore, why did you say that the author of the work was Alberto Sosa? This seems very unlikely, as it doesn't look like a selfie. And following one from this: the fact that you uploaded the picture of Sosa implies that you know Sosa. If this is the case, you must read about editing with a conflict of interest. If you are in fact Sosa, then you should read autobiography to understand why you are very very strongly discouraged from writing about yourself on Wikipedia. Do see now why I advise you to put this aside for a while, as you have much to learn before you can successfully create an article? --ColinFine (talk) 18:19, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How do I reply directly to Nick Moyes?[edit] Can't find anywhere on your Talk page to post a reply. Keen to sort out accidental breach re username, also keen to disclose re possible conflict of interest but right now unable to find where to do things in what feels like a very alien environment. I am happy to pass facts direct to a relevant editor if that is more appropriate than my making changes direct andn am sorry if have inadvertently done the wrong thing, but I can assure you that the Wiki entry on Speyside Way was pointing to the wrong website and displaying the wrong logo. Can provide any number of references in support and don't mind if somebody else wants to fix it! Speysideway (talk) 16:53, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Speysideway: Welcome to the Teahouse. Just click on the "New section" link at the top of User talk:Nick Moyes to start writing something new. He'll get notified when that happens. Meanwhile, I'll just ping Nick Moyes here so that he knows. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 17:07, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Part of Nick's message: "The much simpler way is simply to abandon the account if it's breaching our rules, forget the password, and simply create another account with a username that's preferable. Any WP:COI/WP:PAID declarations can be made on the userpage of that new account, and you can also mention the name of your abandoned account so that there is some linkage remaining." Once you have opened a new account, and on that account's User page, declared your conflict of interest, ideally you cease from directly editing the article and instead propose specific changes on the Talk page of the article. David notMD (talk) 18:11, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to create a second sandbox?[edit] Hello, I've been using my sandbox as a way to keep track of notes for myself. However, I'd like to create a separate space to work on an entire article without actively doing that on the article itself or the article's talk page. Is is possible to create more sandboxes or somehow organize separate projects with my account? Thank you. WyldEys (talk) 17:16, 21 November 2021 (UTC) WyldEys Hello and welcome. You can create additional sandboxes by creating a link to one, say, User:WyldEys/sandbox 2. 331dot (talk) 17:20, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for the quick feedback! That also led me to the help page for Wikipedia:Subpages, and I didn't realize it was so simple. Thanks. WyldEys (talk) 17:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @WyldEys: You can generally create as many sandboxes as you like, everything starting with User:WyldEys/ will be in your user space. You can use the form below to quickly open the edit form for a new subpage. Hope this helps. Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 17:25, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Victor Schmidt mobil: This is extremely helpful, thank you. And the form makes it even simpler yet. Saving this for future use. WyldEys (talk) 17:34, 21 November 2021 (UTC) You can… use VisualEditor on this page?[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… Many pages on Wikipedia cannot use VisualEditor… or so I thought. Apparently, you can edit any page using VisualEditor by entering “https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/insert_your_title_here?veaction=edit”, and VisualEditor will load… have you ever tried this, or do you already know this? Like, as I speak here, I edited this page partially using VisualEditor. I’m kind of puzzled… — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 18:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I already knew this. However, this trick only works on pages that contain wikitext. Pages using a different contextmodel, such as pages containing javascript can't be edited with the Visual Editor, even when you try this trick (it simply won't load). Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 18:57, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @3PPYB6: It's somewhat known, but not effective when editing discussion pages like this one in my experience. I'd use either the WMF-sanctioned Reply Tool or Convenient Discussions, which offer a lot more utility. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 20:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Victor Schmidt mobil, @Tenryuu: Thanks for letting me know. I really would only think that the “hack” listed above is effective for Wikipedia: namespaces. So yeah, thank you. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 20:10, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Copypasting, when it isn't copyvio[edit] Hi Teahouse, I was just cleaning up Public Service Commission (Kenya), the biggest part of which is material copy-pasted from a webpage. The material is relevant, and I don't think it's a copyright violation to copy this if the source is cited. (But maybe it is - I admit that I'm not super familiar with how laws, etc are handled in this context. In that case I suppose someone could throw the whole thing into a block quote.) It's possible to condense this material (and omit parts), but not to paraphrase it. My questions are: does this need to go in a block quote on wikipedia (to avoid copyvio)? And, does this kind of information belong on wikipedia in this form in the first place? Or should it be significantly condensed to only its most important parts anyway? asilvering (talk) 18:55, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I can't verify this, as the alleged source suffers from an expired SSL certificate, however, crediting the source will not automatically mean it's not a copyright violation. The only time crediting the source would suffice is when the material in question is marked as a quote and it's not excessive. Courtesy ping Jmfbleak, who is one of the admins more experienced with handling copyvios. In future you might also want to ask these questions at WP:MCQ, since this is where the experts sit. Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 19:05, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Victor Schmidt mobil I did just verify it myself - I assure you it exists! It is certainly most of the page, but I do think laws and so forth tend to get handled differently than many other kinds of writing. Thanks for the WP:MCQ link! asilvering (talk) 19:12, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Writing a page on British Aviation during WWII[edit] Dear Wikipedia Teahouse. I am new to Wiki writing, and stumbling around a little on how best to proceed with an article. I have looked online for a related topic on this subject, but found that there is no pages that relate to listing and informing about the Aviation companies that were commissioned to design and produce Aircraft during WWII for the UK. There are lists of planes, but no article that discusses the companies or their factories, history, bombing during the war with images in one location. I would be very interested in doing this and having a map showing the location of the factories in the UK. It would be my first article and would be interested in doing a collaborative page if anyone is interested. Advice on how to proceed with a page, with recommendations would be appreciated. I am also interested in making a page on known locations of downed aircraft around the UK's waters. This one might be tricky, as I no of no sources so far that discuses this and may need a lot of research in newspapers. Thank you Chiefming1 (talk) 21:10, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1056445471" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived CS1 errors: empty citation Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 21 November 2021, at 21:10 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH David Biddulph, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 The Future of Wikipedia 2 Draft:Shyam Sunder Jyani 3 How to create click to drop down segments of an article? 4 What to do about unsourced, promotional, biographical articles? 5 I would like to add people on Merseyside people on that Wikipedia page need to be guided through it? 6 Sumner bio 7 Contributions to Signature 8 If a user requests that something is added on a talk page and I (or someone else) has done it, can the request be deleted? Is not, what should be done? 9 Repeated requests for logins 10 Adding well-referenced negative facts 11 Copyright issue 12 Why is my Talk Page post in italics? 13 Can someone tell me how my draft is looking please? 14 Clarification on dispute resolution 14.1 More on dispute question 15 New page 16 Adminstats 17 What to do if wording does not reflect cited source? 18 Would you like to review my draft on "Autism in China"? 19 Stub pages 20 7M Pages 21 Archived URLs 22 Watchlists of other editors 23 PLEASE ACCEPT MY ARTICLE CREATION I WANT TO MAKE ARTICLE WHO POLITICIAN AND CELEBRATIS PERSON 24 How do I know if a page is full? 25 Which tag to use for page protect? 26 DS Alert regarding Arab–Israeli conflict 27 Logo Update Not Appearing in Article 28 Hey, I need help... 29 How to cite this 30 Need Help 31 I keep getting "you need consensus" but when i reply i get no response back. 32 Reliable sources 33 SUGGESTION(actually): A small idea for improved understanding.... 33.1 ======= 33.2 ===== 34 Rootsweb.org/shelby does NOT exist - replaced with https://algenweb.org/shelby 35 Autoconfirmed user 36 Template:Uw-create-kept 37 Template:Uw-redirect-kept 38 Rows and Columns 39 Request for feedback on draft of article 40 How do I remove a picture from my sandbox? 41 Can I add another editor for my own sandbox? 42 Trying to create a list of beastars characters article. 43 Question 44 List formatting 45 The article that I want to create already has a draft. 46 Please help review me for "Jaymark_215! 47 Audio sample 48 Article name problem 49 How do you use gadgets on other languages' Wikipedias? 50 What are the templates for "Year of the tiger" and "This user likes cats". 51 Is therese sources sufficient for an article? 52 Official name for Malaysia language 53 HELP 54 Addition of sources to Myles Moylan page 55 How can I contribute to Wikipedia page 56 Draft:Mikhail Kozlov (politician) 57 How to upload the logo for a walking trail 58 How to hyperlink Wikipedia to other wiki sites 59 How to add a reference text 60 How to edit the references 61 How do I reply directly to Nick Moyes? 62 How to create a second sandbox? 63 You can… use VisualEditor on this page? 64 Copypasting, when it isn't copyvio 65 Writing a page on British Aviation during WWII Most recent archives 1112, 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131 The Future of Wikipedia[edit] Firstly, thank you for the invitation. Due to Wikipedia relying solely on Donations - would it be a possibility that Wikipedia would ever close? I have donated and will donate to WikiMedia, but I think a fundraising option would be great, to advertise Wikipedia's need for donations internationally in person, in the streets. Just a couple of thoughts, Best Regards, StrawberryFieldsChorley StrawberryFieldsChorley (talk) 23:57, 16 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for your donations. Wikipedia needs donations, but I haven't heard that it's particularly pressed for money. So if you have more and are feeling magnanimous, consider one of the various alternatives. (Médecins Sans Frontières seems good.) -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @StrawberryFieldsChorley As Hoary says, 'thank you'. The Wikimedia Foundation actually raises a lot more money than is required simply to meet technical support and server costs, not to mention the 12GW/h of electricity needed to meet the demands of being one of the top most-visited websites in the world. Very large amounts of money are spent in educational and outreach work, especially in the less developed parts of the world where education and access to information is so needed. So, to answer your question as to whether any of the multiple language versions of Wikipedia would ever close, on a purely funding basis, I think the answer is "no". Though, were it ever to spend, year on year, more than it brings in annually, then it could find itself having to 'draw its horns in'. The people who have actually written the content in the 6.2million+ articles on English Wikipedia are all volunteers - just as they are in the myriad of other language projects. So rest assured that your donations never end up in the pockets of us editors. We do it all for the enjoyment and the satisfaction. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:34, 17 November 2021 (UTC) All that said, though, of course Wikipedia will end one day, as will everything humans have created. "Ever" is a very long time. DS (talk) 02:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Can't disagree with that one iota! Nick Moyes (talk) 21:40, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes is right. Given the fact that Wikipedia is the 13th most visited site in the world, and the largest encyclopedia in the history of the world by more than nearly triple the amount that the second largest has, the likelihood of Wikipedia or any other language variants closing is not very great. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 14:43, 17 November 2021 (UTC) "Too big to fail" is not a waterproof argument. Megaupload had fifty million daily users when it was shut down (and Wikipedia is more illegal in some countries than Megaupload was in the US). TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 09:40, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi @StrawberryFieldsChorley: - Wikipedia (specifically, the Wikimedia Foundation) publishes their financial details here. The gist of it is that: They currently get more from donations and grants than they spend, They have around $170 million in cash in their bank account(s), They spend around $2.5 million a year to keep the website running - the rest is for employees, projects, outreach, scholarships, etc. So in case donations suddenly stop entirely, I’m fairly sure they’d be able to cut off a lot of expenses and be able to make do - maybe for 10 years. Of course, 95% of internet users and big tech companies would prefer to not have Wikipedia suddenly disappear, so I’m sure something will get figured out. Juxlos (talk) 10:21, 19 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add that maybe non-English Wikipedia sites may close at some point earlier than the English Wikipedia, due to those sites not being as popular as the English Wikipedia, and having less pages, and albeit less contributors, but let's not focus on that, XD. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:38, 19 November 2021 (UTC) WMF or no, Wikipedia will continue to exist in some form or other for as long as humans have relatively unfettered access to the internet. People will host their own copies of the database, and eventually someone will make their copy updateable, and other people will do the same, and eventually one of those copies will become so much more popular than the others that it crowds them out, and Wikipedia will exist again. DS (talk) 01:15, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Shyam Sunder Jyani[edit] FYI?– Removed leading spaces – ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) Hello there, I am new with Wikipedia community. When I made first edit on a Wikipedia article, I was on cloud nine. After that, I made few other minor changes. I submitted an article to publish. The page url is https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Shyam_Sunder_Jyani . Unfortunately, it has not been accepted and declined. The person whom I wrote article has a significant coverage on print media, online media and with few Govt. official websites. Could you guide me how should I provide accurate and reliable information so that if it get approved if it meets with wikipedia guidelines? I also want to learn best practices of wikipedia. Best, Jakhar Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:52, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: The links in the decline message tell you what you need to do to show that the subject of this article is notable – provide reliable, independent, secondary sources, and cite them using Wikipedia's referencing methods. Verifiability tells you why it's important to add sources to articles and how you can identify reliable sources. Your first source, a faculty profile from the professor's college, would probably be considered a self-published source, and besides, it doesn't say why he is notable. I am not certain whether India Today would be considered reliable (see discussion at § India Today or IndiaToday.com) but even if it is, you would need more than one good source. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) FYI?– Fixed indentation per WP:THREAD – ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) Thank you ClaudineChionh so much for your prompt response and teaching me about reliable sources. Yes, there are few reliable sources are available. Below are the few sources where about him and his initiative is covered in this year. Could you help me out if these are the reliable source? https://www.unccd.int/actionsland-life-programme/land-life-award-2021-healthy-land-healthy-livesBe https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/rajasthan-women-vow-to-nurture-green-family/article34862254.ece https://www.dw.com/en/familial-forestry-in-india-caring-for-trees-like-theyre-family/a-59215321 https://www.unccd.int/news-events/2021-land-life-award-winner-familial-forestry https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CgYwtwGedxg Thank you and I patiently waiting for your further guidance. Jakhar Singh — Preceding unsigned comment added by Jakhar Singh (talk • contribs) 09:35, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Please keep replies threaded by indenting your reply with a colon at the start, and sign your reply adding four tildes (~~~~) at the end. You can enable the Discussion Tools beta feature to indent and sign your replies automatically on talk pages – look for this in Preferences. As to your sources: WP:RSP is a good place to start looking for discussions and consensus on the reliability of many sources. The Hindu: generally yes Deutsche Welle (DW): It's not in the table but archived discussions suggest yes United Nations agencies: It depends on the topic and the agency (see discussion at § Is the United Nations a Reliable Source?) – specific sources should be discussed on the article/draft talk page. YouTube: usually no — Preceding unsigned comment added by ClaudineChionh (talk • contribs) 10:12, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you ClaudineChionh for teaching me. I will look for the sources you suggested. For a new article, Would it be good if just brief about the object in few lines (e.g. 3-5 lines) so it can be approved easily and then subsequent edits can be made? The article which I am writing, he is a Govt. college Professor and apart from his teaching job, he works for environment and society so could I use the phrases like environmentalist and social worker? Could you teach me what needs to keep in mind while writing a first article for best practices? Best Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:38, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Every fact or descriptive phrase you use must be supported by reliable sources. You can read about the steps to create an article, though as I am not an article reviewer, I am not the best person to ask for advice on this process. You are strongly advised to read your first article as well, and it's also a very good idea to spend some time on other tasks here before creating a new article, which is one of the more difficult tasks in Wikipedia. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:22, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Jakhar Singh: Everyone has a slightly different style of articles and word choices - and in this case, one set of phrases you can use is "Shyam Sunder Jyani is an Indian environmentalist and academician". Looking at a glance from google news, I would say Mr. Jyani here does pass Wikipedia's notability guidelines - I hope you don't mind if I stir the article draft up a bit. Juxlos (talk) 10:31, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Minor point: an academician is a member of an academy; it can be used about an academic in general, but academic is a much more common term for a person who works as a professor, lecturer, or researcher at a university. --bonadea contributions talk 10:50, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Fair enough. Regardless, article has been extended with sources ranging from 2009 to 2021 - fairly sure it's good to go, if a bit stubby. Regardless I'm not familiar with the reviewer side of AfC so I'd let other editors do it. Juxlos (talk) 11:01, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Juxlos, Thank you so much for drafting the article of Shyam Sunder Jyani. As I am new with wikipedia hence in the learning phase so I started this Teahouse help talk with ClaudineChionh then you came in and did a great job. The voluntary continuation of wikipedians to humanity is really commendable. I really admire your voluntary services. Bless you. I will keep enhance my learning and give my best to this wikipedia community. P.S. Juxlos, there are minor phrases or grammer tweaks that need to be corrected in the article. I think I am now able to do this... Jakhar Singh (talk) 06:28, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How to create click to drop down segments of an article?[edit] I would like to know how to create one of those click-to-drop-down aspects of an article? I would like to make this page (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sharksploitation) more accessible. People can choose to view the films by release order or alphabetical order or alphabetical for the first film with it's sequels below it. As it is now I need to use Ctrl-f to find what I am looking for Simdude1990 (talk) 16:22, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Do you mean a sortable table? Help:Table has a lot of information about how to create and format tables. Or do you mean "collapsed" content, where you can hide or show part of the content on a page? That's usually not recommended for articles – there is some information about it here. --bonadea contributions talk 16:30, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990: – I didn't manage to ping you the first time... --bonadea contributions talk 16:32, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I mean the collapsed segments. I am thinking something like the following Films in Alphabetical order (collapsed) Films in Alphabetical and Sequel order (collapsed) Films by Genre/type (collapsed) Films in release order (standard article, non-collapsible) - Although I will probably invert the list and separate it by year (or group of years eg 1980-1985, 2000's etc.)--Simdude1990 (talk) 16:44, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990: Welcome to the Teahouse. Like Bonadea said, collapsible content generally shouldn't be collapsed per the Manual of Style. Perhaps sortable tables would work better for you? —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 19:55, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Simdude1990 Firstly, there genuinely isn't enough content in that page to warrant any collapsing/hiding; I can't imagine why on earth you'd think there is? I do, however, agree with @Tenryuu, and feel that a sortable table would allow users to sort these films by year or by title, or by anything else you felt inclined to add. But that would only merit being collapsible were there some other content worthy of bringing to the fore, but I don't see any on this topic. (An example of a very lengthy article that I created which can have its one table hidden to make the whole page more viewable can be found here). Secondly, I really fail to understand why this page exists under that title. Surely it would be better as a List article (e.g. List of sharksploitation films). Nick Moyes (talk) 01:01, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for your input, a sortable table seems like the way to go, I didn't know they existed. I intend on including a lot of other films that are missing from the list, when they are included I'm sure it will be quite large. I may change it to a list page, however, myself or others may add other information that would make it no longer just a list. Some of the films to add don't have Wikipedia pages, they all have IMDB pages or foreign wikis see here for an example. Is it ok to link to those from the movie title? or would it be better to have this (IMDB) next to the corresponding film? or no link except for in the references?--Simdude1990 (talk) 10:55, 18 November 2021 (UTC) List articles on Wikipedia should contain items that still abide by Wikipedia's content policies, particularly verifiablilty and notability. Generally that means that each film should have its own English Wikipedia article (I specify English because other languages tend to have less strict content policies and guidelines); IMDb and foreign wikis aren't acceptable as they are for the most part user-generated, which trashes verifiability. Lists aren't expected to be exhaustive. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 17:07, 18 November 2021 (UTC) "IMDb and foreign wikis aren't acceptable as they are for the most part user-generated" Literally so is this English version of Wikipedia..... I can always build the appropriate pages later and link them in properly, just in the interim, a link so someone can look into the film beyond the list. I will only add films that I have seen, at least then I won't add anything that does not exist--Simdude1990 (talk) 10:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Literally so is this English version of Wikipedia. That is correct, which is why editors are not allowed to cite Wikipedia itself. There's no deadline to have any article "finished", so I'd focus on establishing films' notability with high-quality reliable sources and creating articles for those before adding them onto the list. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 16:30, 19 November 2021 (UTC) What to do about unsourced, promotional, biographical articles?[edit] Hi, I recently came across the article Fayez Barakat while browsing recent changes. The article has mostly been edited by users that only write about Fayez Barakat, has no citations, and the two references with ISBNs seem to be published by a company that has only published books on Fayez Barakat. It contains plenty of unsourced direct quotes, and passages such as: "He is best known as one of the world's most important collectors and dealers of ancient art"; "At the age of 14 Barakat was offered a Fulbright Scholarship to study medicine in the United States on account of his remarkable aptitude for absorbing and understanding information" [seems extremely unlikely]; "Barakat remarks that 'our mind cannot penetrate the mystery of the Universe. We know that the number of galaxies is endless, and we try to listen with the ears of our soul the music they make moving across the infinite skies'. He looks at the universe and at the multitude of galaxies and constellations with a subliminal and telepathic telescope, seeing those eternal lights moving across the infinite through the intuitive eye of his heart. He tries to evade the boundaries of this galaxy through the intuitive dimension, breaking through the limits of space and time, and see the entirety of the infinite and of the eternal. In doing so, he fuses himself into the quantum field, into the energy moving the universe on a sub-atomic and global level. The energy the artist impresses on the canvas is the one that permeates his soul, intellect, senses and instincts, and merges into the energy which animates and moves the universe."; and so on. What do I do about this? It seems to me that the entire article should be deleted for a complete lack of sources or anything establishing notability. But how do I proceed to do this? Do I just start a proposal for deletion? Should I post on the Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons/Noticeboard to get someone more experienced to look it over, or is there something else that would be the best course of action? Thanks in advance for any help! Knuthove (talk) 20:19, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Knuthove (talk) I looked at Fayez Barakat and see it is now tagged as having multiple issues. In addition, the talk page has a new Conflict of Interest tag. Thank you for bringing this to the attention of other editors. Karenthewriter (talk) 22:39, 17 November 2021 (UTC) Knuthove, Never be afraid to remove unverified info, especially puffery of this kind. - hako9 (talk) 22:44, 17 November 2021 (UTC) @Knuthove Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. I see that a number of editors have now tagged the article with their concerns, and I have personally removed swathes of uncited trivia and promotional text, and warned the IP editor about declaring a conflict of interest Assuming you are motivated to take action yourself, you could look for online sources yourself to decide whether or not this person meets our Notability Criteria for living people. The page called WP:BEFORE outlines the steps one should take prior to putting an article forward for deletion. I note there are various sources listed, though the one I did search out (see here) is clearly a self-published gallery catalogue. Maybe others are too, though some of the claims in the article (if true) do suggest he might well be notable. So some further investigation would be helpful, and then perhaps a post at WP:BLP/N could be merited if its still not clear. I hope this helps, and thanks for raising your question here. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:47, 17 November 2021 (UTC) It has now been stripped down to a mere stub, citing three sources. This may look promising, until one realizes that all three are only interviews. (I'm surprised that WP:RS doesn't mention interviews; all that I can find in a hurry is Wikipedia:Interviews, which is merely a somewhat waffly essay.) -- Hoary (talk) 23:38, 17 November 2021 (UTC) I looked for Fayez Barakat on Google and found his Wikipedia article and numerous Fayez Barakat generated cites. Then I went to newspapers.com and found one article (https://www.newspapers.com/image/148931789/?terms=%22Fayez%20Barakat%22&match=1) about the art dealer allegedly buying stolen items. He does not seem to have much media coverage. Karenthewriter (talk) 01:39, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you all for your comments and editing! I see that the article now is just about what I would have made it if I had removed the unsourced parts myself rather than ask about it here. The reason I didn't do that was because I thought the article might simply be deleted instead. Reading your comments, it seems to me that the question is whether the interviews now listed as sources are enough to establish notability, and if any other sources can be found. I am skeptical that these interviews are independent enough, and seeing how hard finding other sources appears to be, it doesn't look good. I'll go through the steps in WP:BEFORE and see about starting my first AfD discussion eventually. Knuthove (talk) 14:14, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Interviews themselves are never considered independent, although some published interviews can contain a blurb or other critical commentary that is itself independent. This looks like a decent source. Possibly the Barakat gallery might be more notable than its owner. If the article is kept, there are probably sources to be found about the "looted art" angle (for instance, see here is a blog post about a procedure that Iran won against the gallery, blog post but by a law professor so probably usable for the claim that a trial was held) - my layman understanding after a cursory search is that the gallery makes a decent try to avoid buying art registered as stolen, but will still buy stuff "found" by amateurs which surely encourages dubious collection methods. TigraanClick here for my talk page ("private" contact) 09:58, 19 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people on that Wikipedia page need to be guided through it?[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 15:35, 18 November 2021 (UTC) The relevant page is List of people from Merseyside. As you can see, ACtiling has made many edits to the page, with good intentions, but many have had to be reverted as they also removed people without any reason, and were misplaced. Any guidance from editors here that can be offered to this enthusiastic editor will, I'm sure, help. Ghmyrtle (talk) 15:43, 18 November 2021 (UTC) ACtiling Please read the policy at WP:LISTPEOPLE.--Shantavira|feed me 16:09, 18 November 2021 (UTC) Sumner bio[edit] It's okay with me if you delete the biography I wrote of myself. I am not a "notable" person and don't meet your guidelines. Indiana Author (talk) 19:41, 18 November 2021 (UTC) @Indiana Author: The article was proposed for deletion shorty after you created it, but another editor stepped in, deprodded it and tried to improve it. Wikipedia generally tries to discourage people from creating articles about themselves as explained here and here because they often don't realize what it means to have a Wikipedia article written about them. If you're considered to be someone who doesn't meet any of Wikipedia's notability guidelines like WP:GNG, WP:NAUTHOR, or WP:NPROF, then that would be a valid reason for the article to be deleted. If you just want the article to be deleted because you feel you made a mistake in creating it and are concerned it may somehow have real world implications, then you might also be able to request a courtesy deletion. Otherwise, it might be hard to have the article deleted at this point if other editors are actively working on trying to improve it and feel you actually are Wikipedia notable enough to have an article created about you. The best thing to do might be to seek further assistance at Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons/Noticeboard or Wikipedia:Administrators' noticeboard. -- Marchjuly (talk) 22:26, 18 November 2021 (UTC) If you think it should be deleted, see WP:G7. ? Qwerfjkltalk 15:55, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Contributions to Signature[edit] I have seen many who have a contributions section along with their signature. I also want to enable that settings. Can anyone here assist me, on how I can add a contributions tab in my signature?  Itcouldbepossible (talk) 02:52, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: Sure – WP:SIG § CustomSig tells you how to customise your signature in preferences (please read the policies and guidelines before trying anything too fancy) and you can link to your contributions using [[Special:Contributions/Itcouldbepossible]]. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 06:13, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh Thanks I will read and do the necessary. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:52, 19 November 2021 (UTC) If a user requests that something is added on a talk page and I (or someone else) has done it, can the request be deleted? Is not, what should be done?[edit] I have noticed some talk pages have sections such as "can x be added to this page?", "y is missing, can it be added?", etc. If I or someone else adds the requested bit of information, what is an acceptable action to take regarding the user's section? I feel that too many redundant and outdated sections can clog up the page, but I'm not sure what is acceptable to do in this case. ReidMoffat (talk) 05:36, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @ReidMoffat: WP:TALK has the general guidelines on talk pages; it's generally better to archive rather than delete discussions or requests that have concluded. Many talk pages are automatically archived by bots; these can be identified by a box at the top of the page indicating that it gets archived. There is also a range of icons that editors use to mark whether a task is done or in progress – {{Done}} shows you the available icons. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 06:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @ReidMoffat: You should find some information in WP:ERREQ and on the documentation page for Template:Request edit about this. The template {{Done}} is OK for many cases, but it's probably better to follow the instructions at Template:Request edit#Response options because of the peculiarities of that particular template's syntax and how edit requests made using it are categorized. Regardless, you shouldn't remove or otherwise modify the posts made by other editors from talk page as pointed out above by ClaudineChionh, except in some certain specific cases like the ones listed in WP:TPO. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:45, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Repeated requests for logins[edit] In the past 30 days, when I enter Wikipedia each day, I notice that I'm not logged in even though each day this appear, I login and check the block "Keep me logged in for 365 days". I'm using a password that was NOT automatically generated by either the Wikipedia software nor by my browser (Chrome). I'm running an iMac under Apple's OSX 10.13.6 and using Google Chrome as a default browser Version 96.0.4664.55 (Official Build) (x86_64) as I have been for several years without this problem. Any suggestions? "What fun would there be if we already knew all there is to know?" 07:39, 19 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by Magillaonfire (talk • contribs) This has been answered at the Help Desk. Magillaonfire, please limit your question to either here or the Help Desk to prevent redundant editor effort. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 08:35, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the not-so-very-helpful reply. I did that hoping that someone in either location would have an answer. Nothing has been changed in either my OS or in my browser settings but I guess I'll just have to take your gentle slap-on-the-nose-with-a-rolled-up-newspaper and go back and check something I've already checked at least twice. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Magillaonfire (talk • contribs) 23:59, 19 November 2021 (UTC) You're welcome. If you still don't get a suitable reply by the time that question is archived, try asking at WP:VPT. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 05:57, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Adding well-referenced negative facts[edit] Hello, I would like to know whether my edits are applicable or not. They are well referenced and I have tried my best to have a neutral tone. Factually, the edits state bad facts, but are rewritten from third-party sources, including major publications like The New York Times. Please vote: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure#Controversies%2FNegative_Facts https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock#Controversies%2FNegative_Facts Centrereded (talk) 09:08, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Centrereded (talk) 09:08, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded I have only checked the second article. When your edit was reverted you were told about WP:BRD and asked to form consensus on the talk page. Instead, you asked there, and here, "What is wrong with my edits?" The answer is that there may or may not be anything wrong with them, but you have been asked to build consensus. So please seek to do that. That does not mean asking what is wrong, it means putting the case for your edits. There is a huge difference. FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 09:20, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded Note, please, This COIN discussion FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 09:23, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @User:Timtrent How do I reach a consensus? I asked people to vote. What's the official way?Centrereded (talk) 10:17, 19 November 2021 (UTC) You started discussions on the Talk pages of those two articles on 19 Nov. For both, you should invite the editors who reverted your repeated attempts to add Controversy sections to the articles, as their Edit summaries were critical of your content and/or referencing. There is no rush. I also have a concern, in that on the Talk pages, you wrote " The words are originally not mine, but from the referenced." Does this mean you are copy/pasting content from the sources? David notMD (talk) 11:25, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded What we are aiming for is a friendly, balanced discussion. Usually, these are informal, with one set fo views holding sway. This builds a simple consensus. We may not agree with a consensus, but we must honour it. If you find that consensus goes against you, and it can, but you feel that your arguments have validity, you can take it further to seek to reach a formal consensus. This is, generally, frowned upon if one has not attempted a simple consensus first. All editors have the right to seek to have their views prevail. No-one of us carries more clout than another of us. One editor equals one opinion, however, consensus is not a ballot, not a beauty pageant. It is the arguments that build consensus, not weight of numbers. Therefore one may ask for an uninvolved editor to "close" any discussion, not necessarily admins. FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 16:42, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Copyright issue[edit] Hi, I am a bit overwhelmed by the huge set of rules on how to report a copyright issue, so I figured I'd just leave it here FYI, and you can do what you will with it. :-) On the German Wikipedia, we have just had to delete a large number of articles by this user. He contributes in at least ten different languages, and his language proficiency in most of these may be doubted. The German articles at least were machine generated, and some of them were barely comprehensible. Since there were only sources given in Azerbaijani language, this was nearly impossible to fix. Now for the copyright issue: The user apparently machine translates snippets from this source and turns them into Wikipedia articles. His necropolis articles at least seem to have evolved that way. The source itself includes a copyright sign and no indication of Creative Commons licensing, so I don't see how this would be public domain material. As the English necropolis articles by this user are nearly identical, I assume that he has used the same method here, maybe - with a little more knowledge of English than German - smoothing things out a little more.  91.34.32.188 (talk) 11:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) FYI - User:Elmar Bax??liyev was indef blocked in 2018 for repeated copyright violations, unblocked in Sept 2021. Since then, has created more than 30 articles in English Wikipedia about archeological sites, some as short as a few sentences with 1-2 refs. The unanswered question is whether EB has returned to copy/translate/paste. David notMD (talk) 11:38, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Definitely. Just throw the appropriate parts from that source into Google Translate, and the result is clear as day. Even though Google Translate does struggle more with the Azerbaijani language than whatever machine this user has been using. --91.34.32.188 (talk) 12:21, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks @91.34.32.188 for bringing this up. If you compare e.g. en:Arat?p? necropolis with az:Arat?p? nekropolu with [1] page 60 Nr. 105 ?r?t?p? n?kr?p?lu its obviously copyvio. I deleted 14 articles of this user in deWP about necropolises as copyright violation from this source. Johannnes89 (talk) 12:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Joe as the admin who unblocked this user -- FYI. --91.34.32.188 (talk) 12:30, 19 November 2021 (UTC) FYI: Elmar Bax??liyev (talk · contribs) indeffed by ToBeFree for copyright violations after a previous indef block for the same issiue. Victor Schmidt (talk) 15:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Maybe someone would care to have a look at the Commons images used by this user, uploaded by another user by the name of Etiunian. I know this is not Commons here, but I have serious doubts as to the copyright situation of those images. Many of them look like scans from books to me. I asked at the Commons "Village pump" about this but didn't get a reply so far. --91.34.32.188 (talk) 21:18, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Why is my Talk Page post in italics?[edit] Hi there, I recently made a new post/section on a Talk Page, and I was wondering why the entire thing is in italics? I tried looking through a few documentation pages, but couldn't seem to find any answers. The post in question is here: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ulrich_Kutschera#Kutschera_2021_article_-_%22Sex_and_Covid-19%22_%28ref._34%29 Thanks for your help! NeuroJasper (talk) 12:26, 19 November 2021 (UTC) User:PrincessPersnickety fixed it. David notMD (talk) 13:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi User:NeuroJasper. The post above yours on the talk page used italics, but was missing the code to change it back to normal. Princess Persnickety (talk) 13:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you, User:PrincessPersnickety! I've checked out the revision history to see what you changed, so I can hopefully avoid similar problems in the future. I'll be sure to keep an eye out for angled brackets as one possible cause, the next time I encounter something like this. :) NeuroJasper (talk) 13:09, 19 November 2021 (UTC) You're welcome :) I only know because I encountered the same problem myself a while ago when all my text came out tiny and I couldn't figure out why. Princess Persnickety (talk) 13:13, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Can someone tell me how my draft is looking please?[edit] Hey all, Sorry, first time here and still trying to get used to the Wikipedia layout. May someone please check my recent draft? I've tried to follow all guidelines possible but just want to make sure I'm on the right page. Many thanks Southpointmusic (talk) 15:19, 19 November 2021 (UTC)  Courtesy link: Draft:Southpoint (Record Label) Hi @Southpointmusic! You've successfully submitted your draft, so someone will come along to review it. We have a backlog, so it might take a while, but check back periodically. Cheers, {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 15:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) See your Talk page for explanation for the draft being nominated for Speedy deletion, and the path open to you to appeal the indefinite block of your previous User name. David notMD (talk) 17:27, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Clarification on dispute resolution[edit] I am headed toward dispute resolution with another editor and, as a relatively new contributor/editor, I want to be clear on the procedure. I had initiated the discussion with him on our individual talk pages because looking at the article talk page there was nothing like a previous us of the page for dispute resolution, nothing much on the page at all. I thought that we could do best talking with each other directly, which we did civilly and thoroughly through the deletion of my original edit, my following his advice in a second edit which was then immed. deleted, etc. ( won't further litigate it here). I see that dispute resolution instructions say "Before making a request here, be sure that the issue has been thoroughly discussed on the article talk page. 3O is only for assistance in resolving disagreements that have come to a standstill." - which this has come to. This has not been on the article talk page, I see no way of productively putting it there at this point. Can I take it to dispute directly from our already existing discussion? I intend to follow the problem to its resolution by a third party or parties. Thank you in advance. Vabookwriter (talk) 15:45, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Vabookwriter (talk) 15:45, 19 November 2021 (UTC) More on dispute question[edit] My confusion is in part because of this kind of inconsistent instruction: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Dispute_resolution There are many methods on Wikipedia for resolving disputes. Most methods are not formal processes and do not involve third-party intervention. Respond to all disputes or grievances, in the first instance, by approaching the editor or editors concerned and explaining which of their edits you object to and why you object. Use the article talk page or their user talk page to do so; be civil, polite, and always assume good faith. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Dispute_resolution_noticeboard/request?withJS=MediaWiki:DRN-wizard.js&withCSS=MediaWiki:DRN-wizard.css Has this issue been discussed extensively on the article talk page? (If you don't know what an article talk page is, answer "Not yet".) Thank you Vabookwriter (talk) 16:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Vabookwriter. Disputes about article content should always be discussed thoroughly on the article talk page before beginning other forms of dispute resolution. Other editors interested in that article will not know what has been said on two editor's talk pages. So, have the conversation in the correct place first before trying anything else. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 16:20, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Vabookwriter, to kick off a new section in the article talk page you can add a statement of the situation so far, and add links to the discussions that are on other pages. That way anyone else coming along to the article can follow the cross-links and see what's been said. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 21:54, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Never mind, in this case it looks like another editor has already copied the discussion text instead of linking to it which is also a valid approach. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 22:02, 20 November 2021 (UTC) New page[edit] how to write a new page . Thanks Lelemera (talk) 16:33, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Follow the instructions here. Polyamorph (talk) 17:04, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lelemera, and welcome to the Teahouse. I will add something to what Polyamorph said: new editors who try to create encyclopaedia articles before they have learnt how Wikipedia works often have a disappointing and frustrating experience, and end up wasting a lot of their own time, and other people's time. My advice to new editors who want to create an article is to put the idea aside for at least six months while you "learn the craft" of editing Wikipedia, by making small improvements to some of our existing six million articles. --ColinFine (talk) 17:19, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Adminstats[edit] Hello I placed administats Template on my userpage 2days ago still not created by the bot. ? ??? ?????? (talk) 17:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) ? ??? ?????? (talk) 17:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) The bot will not process the template on your userpage because you are not an admin. Polyamorph (talk) 17:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) What to do if wording does not reflect cited source?[edit] What to do if wording does not reflect cited source? I'm trying to help clean up some parts of the feminism article that have been changed/added since it received GA status 10 years ago. The second sentence of the article cites a source which, upon checking, does not say what what was written. It seems (to me) to reflect someone's own opinion rather than the source, and I'm also aware that what's on Wikipedia shouldn't copy verbatim. How should I address this? (I've already posted on the talk page about several issues, though not this one in particular, and have received limited feedback). Pernicious.Editor (talk) 18:11, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Pernicious.Editor: Welcome to the Teahouse. If something appears to be editorial opinion, you can boldly remove it. Alternatively, if you would like readers and interested editors to be aware of the problem, you can add a {{failed verification}} template right after the contentious passage. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 20:10, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Would you like to review my draft on "Autism in China"?[edit] Dear all, My draft article page on "Autism in China": https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Autism_in_China#Diagnosis I am drafting a Wikipedia article on "Autism in China", a topic which I believe has notability and which should have its own article, since there are few attempts to synthesize information on this topic. It is my first time ever writing an article though, so may I ask if someone would like to make suggestions on: 1) Organization (Overview — Epidemiology — History and progress, etc.) 2) Grammar and tense (should I stick with present tense throughout?) 3) Sources and citations 4) I tried to upload a poster image of the movie "Ocean Heaven" to the Media coverage— Ocean Heaven section, but it says I don't have the copyright. What should I do? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ocean-heaven-chinese-movie-poster.jpeg (this is the file link) Thanks in advance!! Ha.susulat (talk) 19:48, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Ha.susulat Welcome to the Teahouse. Firstly, well done on getting as far as you have with a Draft article as a brand new user. That's no mean feat in itself. It's not yet in a form where it could be properly 'reviewed', so I have a mix of general comments which I hope may assist you: Firstly, I looked to see what other 'Autism in ....' article there were, and only found Autism in india, which then redirects one to Global perceptions of autism. I presume you were aware of that article? If not, you should perhaps ensure that that page is up to date in the relevant section, or add a subsection for China. It is always possible to add a 'See main article' link to then take a user to a more detailed page. And that, I assume, is what your draft would cover?. It's important not to add general things into a detailed article which ought to have been covered elsewhere. So just use wikilinks to tie these together. Only explain diagnosis procedures if they are remarkably different from elsewhere. If they are, ensure you use reliable source to demonstrate how those procedures differ. (I did think that section was too lengthy) Forget trying to use images with special non-free image rationales in draft articles. Images can be added later, and have no impact on whether a page reaches our bar for Notability. I have now just appreciated that you asked a very similar question a few days ago (now archived here). I can probably add little to what you were told, especially to seek input from editors at WP:WikiProject Autism. I don't think you are wasting your time with this draft, but there is much work still to do before it could be properly reviewed as an article. Seeking feedback or input into the Draft from more specialist editors is probably the right way to go, yet I don't see you having asked there yet. Finally, and out of interest, are you doing this out of general concern, or for a college project, or in order to raise awareness of specific organisations that you represent? It might be a good idea to introduce yourself on your userpage and explain your interests in editing Wikipedia on this topic. There's further advice at WP:COI for anyone already working inside the autism field to make clear their involvement. That won't stop you editing, but we always aim for openness here. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 20:35, 19 November 2021 (UTC) I remember there's an essay on X about Y and how those articles should only be created when the combination of the two topics is notable. Can't remember though. Sungodtemple (talk) 21:03, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Stub pages[edit] I know I might be taking on a project that I may regret doing (lol) but here we go. I've noticed a plethora of stub pages, especially regarding early 20th century and late 19th century baseball players. I was curious if there is an exact list of how many of these are stubs. I have plenty of resources (meaning websites and books) where I can flesh out a great number of these pages. Keep in mind I'm focusing on the above target and stub pages for current and former NFL players only. Is there a page I can use as a guide for this rather large task?  Sportsfan1976 I'm only here because I'm not currently somewhere else. (talk) 21:17, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Sportsfan1976. Category: Baseball stubs would be a good place to start. Cullen328 Let's discuss it 21:24, 19 November 2021 (UTC) 7M Pages[edit] About when would Wikipedia reach 7 million pages? We're currently almost at 6.5 million pages, and by the looks of it, Wikipedia looks like it could either reach 7M by early-mid 2022, or late 2022-early2023. How long did it take for Wikipedia to get from 5M to 6M? WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 22:36, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @WaterflameIsAwesome: Welcome to the teahouse. To date, we've reached 6.4 million articles, and so far I'm thinking we can reach to 7 million articles by mid, late 2022. But if article creation increases rapidly, we can reach 7 million by mid 2022. However, if it goes slow, (which I don't expect) we will reach at this point by 2023. Also, for the 5-6M, we aren't sure about this one. But, if wikipedia was made 19 years ago, (19 divided by 5-6 =3-4) I'm estimating to reach either 3 to 4 years. Severestorm28 (talk) 22:47, 19 November 2021 (UTC) English Wikipedia reached five million articles on 1 November 2015, and six million on 23 January 2020. --bonadea contributions talk 23:09, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Bonadea: That would take 5 years. Severestorm28 (talk) 23:36, 19 November 2021 (UTC) Ok, so if we're going at the speed of 5-6 million, then I'm guessing maybe 3 more years? lol. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 00:47, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Severestorm28 that would actually take a little over four years. November 1st of 2015 is closer to January 1st 2016 than same date 2015, so it's a little over four years, rather than a little under five years. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:10, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @WaterflameIsAwesome: That's true. Severestorm28 (talk) 18:56, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Archived URLs[edit] How do I know if a website URL has been archived or not? Kaleeb18 (talk) 23:00, 19 November 2021 (UTC) @Kaleeb18: You could always go to archive.org and search for the URL. In the context of references on Wikipedia, there is a tool to automatically add the archive URL into the citation temple. Go to the "View history" tab on any article and click the "Fix dead links" button to access the tool. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 00:59, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Ganbaruby: Thank you so much I found exactly what I needed; that tool saved me a lot of time and work I would've had to do. Kaleeb18 (talk) 04:35, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Watchlists of other editors[edit] I have learned how to see your own edit counts, and the edit counts of other editors etc. But is it possible to see what is on the watchlists of other editors? Thanks! Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 00:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Th78blue! See Help:Watchlist#Privacy. You can't see the contents of other editors' watchlists, and other editors—including administrators—cannot view the contents of your watchlist. Developers who have access to the servers that hold the Wikipedia database can obtain this information. DanCherek (talk) 00:27, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks! That answered my question! Do I then delete this from the "teahouse" since my question is now answered? Th78blue (They/Them/Their • talk) 00:35, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Great! This thread can be left as is, since it might help other editors who have the same question, and a bot will archive it in a couple days. DanCherek (talk) 00:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) PLEASE ACCEPT MY ARTICLE CREATION I WANT TO MAKE ARTICLE WHO POLITICIAN AND CELEBRATIS PERSON[edit] Hi I'm khogendra Rupini i want to create celebrities Article in Wikipedia and i have a one question why Wikipedia decline my article KhogendrarupiniKdr12 (talk) 01:21, 20 November 2021 (UTC)khogendrarupini See the explanation at User_talk:KhogendrarupiniKdr12. You cannot use Wikipedia for promotion. RudolfRed (talk) 01:23, 20 November 2021 (UTC) And please don't shout. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 02:27, 20 November 2021 (UTC) OP has been blocked as a sockpuppet. --Kinu t/c 03:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @KhogendrarupiniKdr12 please be more mature in your Teahouse questions. Shouting is a big no-no as well. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 03:08, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How do I know if a page is full?[edit] I thought I was getting proficient with Wikipedia, but lately, my edits have been consistently rejected. Wondering what to do and how to contribute more to pages of my interest. Smcupcake19 (talk) 01:34, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Smcupcake19: Wikipedia is not made of paper, so it doesn't really get "full". However, a brief look at your talk page shows that you have been involved in some long and heated debates about Scrappy-Doo and Draft:Scrappy-Doo Biography. Did you have specific questions about the advice that was given to you on those articles' talk pages, or questions about another aspect of editing Wikipedia? ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 01:47, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, the Scrappy debate was specifically where I wanted feedback. I truly do want to make that page look as good as I can; and I was specifically wondering what kinds of edits would be indubitably welcome, since after initial smooth sailing with my endeavor, as I mentioned above my edits now appear to be quickly deleted, even after making several attempts to compromise. After putting a special amount of effort to keep my most recent edit inoffensive and still finding it quickly deemed unacceptable. I'd just like to know how to make sure my edits can have some reliable permanence; doing so is becoming increasingly elusive.--Smcupcake19 (talk) 04:48, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Talk:Scrappy-Doo makes clear that your efforts on Scrappy-Doo and Draft:Scrappy-Doo Biography have run aground on various issues, including copyright and fancruft. I suggest you read Wikipedia:Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass and some of the links therein. Perhaps, after more than a year at this task, you consider other topics, animated or not. David notMD (talk) 10:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) With all due respect, my path is not singleminded. If there is anything that can be suggest for improving that page that would be acceptable, I'll take it. --Smcupcake19 (talk) 19:50, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Which tag to use for page protect?[edit] Which tag to use for page protect? Coolblack4 (talk) 02:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Coolblack4: You can request page protection at the requests for page protection noticeboard, after you have read the instructions at the top of this page as well as the protection policy. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 02:24, 20 November 2021 (UTC) DS Alert regarding Arab–Israeli conflict[edit] Hi, I have received a DS Alert regarding the Arab–Israeli conflict, but I have made no edits regarding that topic whatsoever. WarKosign who issued the alert previously reverted an edit I made adding Mandaeans to 'See Also' section at the bottom of the Israelites article. I explained to them that scholars see Mandaeans being likely of Judean/Jewish origin and received a DS Alert shortly afterwards regarding the Arab-Israeli conflict. I don't see how the two topics are related. I have left a message on their talk page but have not received a reply. Can you please advise on how to resolve this issue. Thanks. Mcvti (talk) 02:18, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hi @Mcvti! The idea of something being related to the Arab–Israeli conflict is interpreted extremely loosely, so an article like Israelites would probably qualify. DS Alerts, while they might look scary, mean what they say that you haven't done anything wrong, so there's not any issue that you have to worry about resolving. It's just a "heads up, this is a sensitive topic area, so please be cautious". Feel free to carry on editing! Cheers, {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 02:50, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Logo Update Not Appearing in Article[edit] I recently have been updating Major Arena Soccer League and tried to update the league's logo by uploading the logo's .svg as a new version of the existing logo. It seems to work, but the thumbnail of the current logo in the file history and it's representation in the article itself seem to be the old logo. The non-free use rationale and the licensing should be identical as the existing logo, so I'm confused at what I need to do to make the logo on the article update. Logo in question: File:Major Arena Soccer League logo.svg  Packerfan213 (talk) 04:09, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Packerfan213: The logo seems to be appearing in the article now, but a couple of other things for reference. Please don't display non-free content anywhere other than the article namespace per non-free content use criterion #9. If you want to discuss a non-free file, provide a link to it instead as explained here. Please don't overwrite a file like you did in this case except for only minor changes like a size reduction, straightening, minor coloring change, etc. When a logo completely changes like what seems to be the case here, it's better to upload it as a completely new file altogether. Another reason for doing this is related to #3 below. This new version of the logo seems like it might actually not need to be licensed as non-free per c:COM:TOO United States and wordmark. All-text logos tend to be considered too simple for copyright protection in the United States; so, you actually might be able to upload this to Commons instead of Wikipedia under a license of c:Template:PD-textlogo. You might want to ask about this at c:COM:VPC just to make sure, but I think it should be OK for Commons. — Marchjuly (talk) 04:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Marchjuly: Thanks for the quick reply! Is there any way for an admin to delete the file history of the old logo to keep it at just the original then? I'll go to Commons and make a new file upload with the proper licensing info; I made a similar upload for the text based logo of the Milwaukee Wave. Packerfan213 (talk) 04:43, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Just revert back to the original version and add {{furd}} to the top of the file's page. The will mark the unused revisions of the file for speedy deletion per WP:F5. — Marchjuly (talk) 04:58, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks again! Sorry for making a mess out of that file's history, but everything should be sorted now I hope. Packerfan213 (talk) 05:10, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hey, I need help...[edit]  User98207252129 (talk) 05:13, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hey, I have a question, where can I report a Vandalism I saw in an article from Sinterklaas? If you go to this link and see the left side of the revision. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sinterklaas&type=revision&diff=1056159685&oldid=1056159438 by 184.16.185.34 (talk+ · tag · contribs · filter log · WHOIS · RBLs · proxy check · block user · block log · cross-wiki contribs · CheckUser (log)), Thanks! @User98207252129: nothing to worry about. As evident from the Difflink you gave above, the edit has already been reverted by Acroterion. See Wikipedia:Vandalism to learn more about vandalism and how to combat it. Please be aaware that not everything unconstructive is nessesary vandalism. Victor Schmidt (talk) 06:34, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Make sense. Thank you for your response! — Preceding unsigned comment added by User98207252129 (talk • contribs) 07:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How to cite this[edit] I want to cite the management plan for the Hidden Christian Sites in the Nagasaki Region world heritage site. It can be found here however it doesn't open the management plan just the link to open it, how can I cite the file directly, Thank You. Tai123.123 (talk) 06:32, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Tai123.123: Instead of linking the listing, you can use the document URL instead, which appears to be https://whc.unesco.org/document/160504. A cite to this would look something like this:[1]. When citing a PDF as large as this, please do not forget specifying the page number. Victor Schmidt (talk) 06:45, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Tai123.123: I've tweaked Victor Schmidt's example above to include the year of publication and an example page number for you. I agree that a 351 page document, 191Mbyte download is far too large to use as a supporting citation without giving a page number. Because it is likely that such an extensive reference might be used multiple times throughout the document, I've used the REFNAME feature to give it a name so that you can call up the citation two or more times without having to re-enter the details. Thus, five uses of that source across a long article would link to just one entry in the 'References' section, which is much tidier than repeating it five times. Your can use the {{rp}} template to insert the exact page number after each use of the reference. Thus: Hidden Christians passed on their faith from one generation to the next.[1]:?23? Most elements are found along coastal areas and remote islands.[1]:?86? Plans have been prepared to build renewable energy facilities in both the suburbs and on some of the remote islands. This will include solar, tidal and wind energy generation.[1]:?265? I hope you might find that useful. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:52, 20 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ a b c d "Comprehensive Preservation and Management Plan - Hidden Christian Sites in the Nagasaki Region" (pdf). Unesco World Heritage Centre. 2017. p. 350-351. Retrieved 2021-11-20. Need Help[edit] I really need help finding the real names of two esports players in the 2019 MotoGP eSports Championship. There gamertags are XxBoMbeR_45xX and Rllorca. If you ever find their names include them in this page: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2019_MotoGP_eSports_Championship MickeyD's234 (talk) 07:58, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @MickeyD's234 I have moved the page you created to Draft space as it is uncited and probably not notable. I suggest you focus on addressing that, rather than worrying about the real persona of two video gamers. You should submit it through Articles for Creation process when it eventually is. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I keep getting "you need consensus" but when i reply i get no response back.[edit] I keep getting "you need consensus" but when i reply i get no response back. what does it means and why aren't those who post this answering me? I wish to include a solar time-lapse on the "sun" article. can be viewed here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XBmLER08Ryw Daviddayag (talk) 11:03, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I see the issue at Talk:Sun, I think the responder (ScottishFinnishRadish) to your edit request wanted more information about where you want the image placed in the article, what you want as the image caption, why is the image needed? They also wanted to see if you can get input from other users to make sure the image is suitable for inclusion in the featured article Sun (one of wikipedia's highest quality articles). It is better to open a new discussion at Talk:Sun, outline your case for including the image, and see if any regular editors there agree. If so then either they can help you to add the image or you can submit a new edit request. If you have trouble finding someone to respond (perhaps not many people are watching that page), you can try asking at the astronomy wikiproject here: Wikipedia_talk:WikiProject_Astronomy. Polyamorph (talk) 11:26, 20 November 2021 (UTC) It would be more appropriate in the sunspot article, but there are already several good videos there. Also, you have already been told that you should not be adding links to your own YouTube channel.--Shantavira|feed me 11:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Sun - arcs of plasma They're not adding links to their youtube channel, they have uploaded the video to commons. Polyamorph (talk) 12:03, 20 November 2021 (UTC) (edit conflict) Hello @Daviddayag, and welcome to the Teahouse. I can see you've taken and already uploaded to Commons some pretty cool images, and I'm sorry you felt you'd hit a brick wall. I can see why, though it's really down to a simple misunderstanding I think. You made a 'protected page edit request' and were asked to get consensus to add it. The reason for that was that the editor who responded to your edit request would not necessarily have been one experienced in the article, so they advised you to seek CONSENSUS. Unfortunately, I don't think you appreciated that you were expected to initiate that discussion yourself, and that's why nothing has happened, thus far. My advice is to start a new section at Talk:Sun, headed something like 'Proposal to add plasma arc'. Then embed the image as I've done here, with the caption you would propose to use (it doesn't have to be the default one you see here). Most importantly, explain your rationale for inserting it. Would it replace an existing image, to which section would it go in, what textual statement would it support. Sign it and then wait for comments. Then, if there is no response after a week or so, you could be justified to WP:BEBOLD and add it yourself. If the majority view of responders is that it would be a bad idea, then you could discuss further, but eventually be prepared to accept that consensus is against you. Having 'been bold' it's possible your addition might be immediately reverted, and then you can start a discussion on the merits of having yet another image in that article. Now, when I started this, I assumed you did not have the 'auto-confirmed' status to edit semi-protected articles, but you do. So, the choice is yours whether to be bold and simply add it, or start that discussion first. I strongly advise the latter course, and I hope my response has given you a path forward and not discouraged you in any way. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 11:48, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Daviddayag You have exhibited a pattern of adding your own telescope photos to articles when perhaps one more image is not useful, and worse, inserting your name and other unnecessary information in the image captions. Please return to the articles and remove your name. David notMD (talk) 12:27, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Agree with this, you shouldn't add your name to image captions - it is already credited in commons where you uploaded the file. Polyamorph (talk) 12:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Good spot. I've now removed the credit from two articles as it's easily findable in the Commons link, and goes against our policies for crediting pictures within articles. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:58, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Reliable sources[edit] Hi, I'm new to all this, and trying to write an article about a social media personality and youtuber. For this type of article, the usual obvious reliable sources like journal articles and books are few and far between. I have tried to use the best quality sources I can find, like published articles. However, sometimes there is no independent secondary source, so I was wondering: Is using the primary source acceptable (e.g. the YouTube video I refer to, or the about page that states the view count of a channel)? If so, should it be cited as a source or linked to in some other way? Twdavies (talk) 13:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Not for notability, and YouTube, as a rule, is a very dodgy source in the first place. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 13:44, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Twdavies Welcome to the Teahouse. Unfortunately, as was hinted at above, our Notability criteria means that we ignore views or follower counts on YouTube as a measure of notability. We focus instead on whether independent media or other reliable sources have written about that person in detail and in depth. Unless those sources are available, it's unlikely that there would be any article accepted about them. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 14:13, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for your reply, I was thinking more in terms of whether a source is reliable as a source of information, rather than whether it is adequate to demonstrate notability. I believe I have some other sources for other parts of the article that show some level of notability, whether or not it is enough is another issue that I will tackle separately if need be. So the views and follower count were just included as pieces of information, rather than as evidence of notability. I have also found, in the link to the reliable sources page above "For example, even extremely low-quality sources, such as social media, may sometimes be used as self-published sources for routine information about the subjects themselves." And I believe this answers my question of whether some of my sources are adequate. If I am mistaken, please let me know. Twdavies (talk) 14:32, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Twdavies No, I think you're right. I'm sorry I didn't quite appreciate what you're asking. We generally trust the person's own SM feeds on trivia, but not on key factual statements about them. Thus, we gave TV presenter, Chris Packham's, birth date based upon one of his Facebook posts, if I remember correctly. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 14:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for your help Twdavies (talk) 14:54, 20 November 2021 (UTC) As the declining AfC reviewer, the user reached out to me on my talk page, here was my response: Youtube/Reddit/Twitter/Twitch - Most social media stuff is going to be considered unreliable (even if it came directly from the person's mouth, unfortunately). With user-generated content, anyone can say they are a big deal or make outlandish claims and give no information to back it up. Additionally, sites like that are often filled with people who are self-promotional and using those promotional sources in an article to try and paint a good PR picture about themselves on Wikipedia. Apple Podcasts/Spotify, etc. - These sources just show that the podcast exists. They don't really tell us anything about the subject. If they do, it is often written by the host themselves, and that brings us back to the user-generated content situation above. At its core, Wikipedia is a bunch of nerds, and so the site still looks at sources like you would use for an essay in school (newspapers, TV, reputable websites, etc.) For example, let's look at Gus' Wikipedia article (Just because Gus has one and not Eddy does not automatically mean that Eddy should have one, BTW. See WP:OSE): there are definitely some similar issues with the sources there, but Gus also has coverage from the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel and the Burnett County Sentinel. (Note that Gus' article doesn't mention his recent controversies, which is talked about on the talk page for the article. Basically, they can't find a reliable source that gives a shit about Youtube Drama. In closing, I want to thank you for wanting to put a good article together. Making articles for YouTubers is super difficult, because the guidelines of who is notable enough are not well understood. For more information on reliable sources, you can look at Wikipedia:Reliable sources or at one of my favorite lists on the site Wikipedia:Reliable sources/Perennial sources, which looks at many well-known sources and whether or not Wikipedia would consider them reliable. Happy editing! Bkissin (talk) 18:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) SUGGESTION(actually): A small idea for improved understanding....[edit] I don't want to spend a bunch of time one this, as I'm virtually certain it will be wasted... HOWEVER, having said that, hopefully it will make it to someone that knows how to use Wikipedia, and is willing and enthusiastic about navigating through the warren of minutia to make it a slightly better tool over time for everyone. I was reading an article here (which I occasionally do), as this seems to be a helpful tool for the most part, AND... I noticed when reading the following excerpt (keeping in mind, this suggestion has ABSOLUTELY ZERO TO DO WITH THE SUBJECT MATTER): QUOTE: "On 19 August 1958, a West Berlin court fined the former xxxxxxxxxx leader 35,000 marks (approximately £3,000, or US$8,300) (equivalent to €81,248 in 2017)," OBSERVATIONS: =======[edit] 1) You'll notice the author of that statement went to some considerable length to try and enhance the understanding of the reader, by taking an otherwise objective monetary value and translating it for the reader into a currency the reader was likely to understand, AND.... adjusting it for inflation so the reader would have some idea as to the relative value/scope of the amount of money that is being referenced. 2) GREAT! The point of any encyclopaedia is to increase the understanding of things for actual human beings. LOVE IT! 3) This method of translating a continually shifting value (virtually no currency's value stays the same over time, ever! Right?) is not unique, it is often used here and in other places that I'm aware of, to help readers understand a relative amount of currency/money/wealth over time. Often I've seen historical values expressed as "a year's worth of wages in today's money" for example. Very useful in producing human understanding by comparison within a contemporary context, and one with which almost every human being on the planet can relate! 4) If you'll notice, the quoted excerpt mentions "2017". Well, that is a couple years old already and time (in so far as I know) is not going to stop, it's going to keep going, and going, and going, and going... AND... that number including what it means/represents is going to continue to slip further, and further, and further away from it's once accurate translation??!?!? It's not going to get MORE ACCURATE, it's going to continually get less accurate, defeating the whole purpose for which it was intended, understanding it's relative value. 5) Since it would not be very efficient to go back and adjust every one of the attempts to create monetary translations that make sense, by manually recalculating them and adjusting them for inflation periodically, and almost impossible to do considering the number of pages and locations where the technique is used over Wikipedia, it occurred to me that there really ought to be a better way. SUGGESTION: =====[edit] (AND,... sorry it took so long to get here, BTW) WHY NOT CREATE SOME SORT OF PROGRAMMABLE, INLINE, WIDGET YOUR WRITER/EDITOR COMMUNITY COULD DEPLOY THAT WOULD CONSTANTLY SHOW THE READER, WHAT THAT ORIGINAL VALUE IS WORTH TODAY, RIGHT NOW... AT THE TIME OF PULLING THE PAGE? Computers are GREAT at repetitious calculation that would put humans to sleep! This looks to me like a perfect use of the kind of things computer excel at, and would benefit the readers and the writers a great deal, I would think. If you can have a little widget that translates the definition of words inline, so... the reader can hover and get the definition of a word, or the relevance of a name, or... whatever the editor thinks could use enhanced understanding, why not have the same kind of widget for historical monetary translation and adjustment? Inputs: Historical Amount(i.e the original number), Historical date being referenced, and Original Currency. Calculation: Depending on the Historical date/era.... reference the correct table(dataset), probably Gold or CPI. "Boil" the Inputs down to an objective, un-adjusted universal value. Read in the language of the user's browser to get the correct currency with which the user is likely to be familiar. Output: Take the objective, un-adjusted universal value and adjust it for inflation. Convert the adjusted value to the currency likely used by the reader based on the language lookup. Present the relevant number in the Hover. (AND... it's obviously going to be more complex than that. The point here is that it is doable with some effort, enthusiasm, and concern for the reading audience.) Thanks for any time and effort expended on behalf of the reading public. DoNotShootAtMe (talk) 15:51, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, welcome to the teahouse. I apologise, initially I thought this was spam, thanks to Theroadislong for letting me know it wasn't. What you are describing sounds very similar to a template that already exists described here: Template:To USD. Similar templates exist for other currencies, e.g. Template:To EUR. Polyamorph (talk) 19:13, 20 November 2021 (UTC) See also Template:Inflation, Template:FXConvert and related templates listed there. Nick Moyes (talk) 19:20, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Also note that the article that was originally quoted seems to be Artur Axmann, and the line in question does not have the converted value €81,248 hardcoded in the source; it already uses the {{Inflation}} template to convert 35,000 marks in 1958 to current Euros. If you edit the page you will see that it says {{Inflation|DE|35000|1958|fmt=eq|cursign=€}}. So this will automatically adjust for inflation as time goes by. CodeTalker (talk) 19:48, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Rootsweb.org/shelby does NOT exist - replaced with https://algenweb.org/shelby[edit] How do I remove the old rootsweb.org/shelby from Wikipedia and add the new and correct link replacement https://algenweb.org/shelby ... they are sometimes listed in outside related links and/or links on Wikipedia. Thank you. Bjseales (talk) 16:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Bjseales: When asking for assistance, it's helpful to mention the name of the Wikipedia article you're referring to. Your three attempts to include yourself in the Thompson High School article have been reverted. "Notable alumni" sections include people who meet Wikipedia's definition of notability and Wikipedia articles exist about them. It is not a place to list everyone who graduated from the school. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 16:40, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Users only edits are to add spam links to their own websites. Theroadislong (talk) 17:55, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-redirect-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a redirect that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A redirect you created, {{{1}}}, which redirected to [[{{{2}}}]], was under discussion, and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a redirect fits our redirect guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) see question above. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:23, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Rows and Columns[edit] Hey guys! How do you edit rows and columns to Wikitables in the source editor? I screwed up trying to do this and had to use the visual editor. Thanks! BubbaDaAmogus (talk) 18:28, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @BubbaDaAmogus Tables are fiendishly hard. Help:Introduction to tables with Wiki Markup/1 is a good place to start. Use your sandbox and play FiddleTimtrent FaddleTalk to me 18:31, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @BubbaDaAmogus I think Visual Editor's only really useful feature is its handling of adding rows, columns and data into tables. Far better than source editor for small tables - though I've never used it on really big stuff. I'd stick with VE to begin with. Otherwise, tables certainly are 'fiendish', and I always copy existing wikimarkup into my sandbox and attempt to edit it there. Only once I'm successful do I paste it in to a live article. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:00, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Ok, guess I can save myself some thinking and stamina there! Thanks!BubbaDaAmogus (talk) 02:04, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Request for feedback on draft of article[edit] Hi, I have recently started editing Wikipedia and I noticed a red link for Sisir Kana Dhar Chowdhury. I made a draft here and I tagged some projects that looked relevant but I have not received any feedback yet. I wanted to know if I had done something wrong with the tagging or if there is anything I missed while marking the draft as needing approval. Also, some feedback would be appreciated, since it is the first article I have written. Autumn astronomer (talk) 19:31, 20 November 2021 (UTC) "Review waiting, please be patient. This may take 2 months or more, since drafts are reviewed in no specific order. There are 2,468 pending submissions waiting for review." David notMD (talk) 20:19, 20 November 2021 (UTC) How do I remove a picture from my sandbox?[edit]  Kabkabkab (talk) 19:46, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Using Visual Editor, tap/click on the image to select it, and instead of hitting the Edit button in the pop-up, press backspace or delete on your keyboard. (There is no visual affordance for deleting the image that I can see.) Hope that helps! ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:30, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Can I add another editor for my own sandbox?[edit]  Kabkabkab (talk) 19:46, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Kabkabkab! Anyone has the ability to edit your sandbox, it's just a social convention that we don't. (Except to address issues like copyright problems and so on.) ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:17, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Kabkabkab User:Kabkabkab/sandbox Declined 11-20 and resubmitted with only a minor change that did not address the reviewer's comments. Unless you and/or someone else improves it, will be declined again. Minimally, delete Variations, Other recipes and Virals sections. David notMD (talk) 20:24, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I feel that the History, International Distribution, and Marketing sections have promise. Drop value judgements like "delicious" and "succeed ... perfectly". The short description should be changed from "Famous Thai Instant Noodle" to something like "Brand of instant noodles". If you are employed by or contracted to the company, you will need to declare that (see WP:COI and WP:PAID). We get both Wai Wai and Mama brands here in Australia, so as a reader I find some relevance in the nascent article. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 21:21, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Trying to create a list of beastars characters article.[edit] Hi there. I need help submitting an article about list of beastars characters. Garfield Cat & Lasagna (talk) 21:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy: Draft:List of Beastars Characters. Declined once. Beastars exists as an article and includes a list of main characters. David notMD (talk) 22:34, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Garfield Cat & Lasagna I'm sorry, but you've sourced that page to the exisiting article, and none of the characters are deemed as notable in their own right. So, as List articles are there to list notable topics, this draft is a non-starter at this time. Nick Moyes (talk) 23:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Question[edit] what is the one question you would ask the universe? 87.115.124.185 (talk) 23:08, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Welcome to the Teahouse, IP user. This is a help forum for folks encountering difficulties editing Wikipedia. It is not a chat forum. So your question is off-topic and not appropriate here, nor, indeed, anywhere else. That's what social media is best used for. Thank you. Nick Moyes (talk) 23:54, 20 November 2021 (UTC) List formatting[edit] Is there any way to make List1 below have the same formatting (centered, numbers aligned) as List2, which uses the standard # syntax? List1 List2 1. D. Budge =2. W. Sabin =2. B. Riggs 4. F.Kovacs 5. F. Perry 6. D. Skeen =7. B. Barnes =7. W. Van Horn D. Budge B. Riggs W. Sabin F. Kovacs B. Barnes J. Nogrady R. Harman H. Peterson Thanks, Sod25 (talk) 23:19, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Sod2500: Welcome to the Teahouse. Your 'equals' signs push the text over to the right, so my not especially elegant solution would be to add two non-breaking spaces to the beginning of each line without an equals sign to 'pad out' the space, and then to left-align the text. You can use the template {{nbsp}} to add a single space. But, without making a table with position numbers in one column, flag icon and name in another, I can't see a better solution. But maybe someone else can. List1 List2   1. D. Budge =2. W. Sabin =2. B. Riggs   4. F.Kovacs   5. F. Perry   6. D. Skeen =7. B. Barnes =7. W. Van Horn D. Budge B. Riggs W. Sabin F. Kovacs B. Barnes J. Nogrady R. Harman H. Peterson Hope you find this helpful, Nick Moyes (talk) 23:50, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The article that I want to create already has a draft.[edit] The article that I want to create already has a draft. What should I do? Happykrcheese (talk) 00:28, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Happykrcheese Welcome to the Teahouse. You did not say what the draft is, unfortunately. It's not Draft:Countryballs Show - Into Space by any chance, is it? When a draft already exists, it's a good idea to approach the editor already working on it and ask to collaborate with them. There's no point two people creating two drafts on the same subject. In the case of the draft I linked to above, it hasn't been touched since June, contains no content, and will probably be deleted soon. So there'd be no problem you working on it. It's always important to ensure you have good sources to work from, and also that the topic will meet our Notability Criteria. Hope this helps, Nick Moyes (talk) 00:38, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Please help review me for "Jaymark_215![edit] Can you please review for contributions? Smalemon (talk) 01:23, 21 November 2021 (UTC) User:"Jaymark 215 appears to have made close to 300 contributions since creating an account on 7 Nov 2021. Do you have a specific question? David notMD (talk) 03:27, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Possible sockpuppetry or meat farm? "Jaymark 215 has a history of editing several Pasay election results article that are also edited by user:JKLlamera and at least six IP addresses that start with 223.25.63. (83, 162, 101, etc.) as single purpose accounts. David notMD (talk) 03:40, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Example: 2013 Pasay local elections. David notMD (talk) 09:29, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Such IP's geolocate to the area of the Phillipines that includes Pasay. It's not surprising in itself that most of the people interested in editing an article about Pasay's local elections would come from that area, nor perhaps that some of them have little interest in editing anything else. I'm not saying that sockpuppetry isn't happening, but this seems to me to be, in isolation, weak evidence for it. {The poster formerly known as 87.81.230.195} 90.205.225.31 (talk) 19:39, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Article name problem[edit] I recently moved an article to change its name but the article does not show up on the Wikipedia search box when I type in its new name. Can someone tell me why this is happening and how I can fix it? Person077777777 (talk) 03:53, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Person077777777: Did you type in Competitive Pokémon Battling? It must be exactly the same as this. I guess you didn't use the "accented e"? If so, you can fix the problem by creating a redirect page named Competitive Pokemon Battling --Dragoniez (talk) 06:38, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How do you use gadgets on other languages' Wikipedias?[edit] Hi, I'm from the Japanese Wikipedia, and I'm looking for a way to import the strikethrough-blocked-users gadget (jawp doesn't have a setting for this in the preferences). I guess this is a matter of CSS, but I have no idea where I can find the original script. I would appreciate any help. -- Dragoniez (talk) 06:32, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dragoniez: Special:Gadgets lists the gadgets installed in a wiki. The source for this one is at MediaWiki:Gadget-markblocked.js, and it has instructions for importing it into another wiki by adding the code in lines 3 and 4 to your common.js in jawp. I haven't tried this, though. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 06:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh: Thanks a lot! It worked like a charm. --Dragoniez (talk) 06:58, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dragoniez: Oh, good to know! ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) What are the templates for "Year of the tiger" and "This user likes cats".[edit] I would like to add two userboxes to my page. So, I would like to know what the templates are for: • This User was born in the Year of the Tiger. • This User likes cats. ArtFlow29 (J.) (talk) 07:09, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @ArtFlow29 (J.) Welcome to the Teahouse. The templates you refer to are called userboxes. You can look through hundreds of them at Wikipedia:Userboxes/Galleries. They go on your userpage. But, at present, you have such a ridiculously huge image on your userpage that adding anything else would be pointless until you fix that - perhaps by inserting a |thumb| parameter. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 14:18, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for your very kind help! ArtFlow29 (J.) (talk) 19:50, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Is therese sources sufficient for an article?[edit] Hello, I am writing an article about a games studio. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Midoki) I searched on the internet and found these sources: http://midoki.com/ https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-32145285 Is these sources enough for this article? ;p7ti (talk) 08:16, 21 November 2021 (UTC) ;p7ti Hello and welcome. The website of the studio would be a primary source and not acceptable for establishing notability.(though it might be for some other things) The BBC source seems to be at least partially based on an interview with the founder of the company, though there might be some content there that could be used in an article. If you are submitting your draft for review, most reviewers look for at least three reliable sources with significant coverage. 331dot (talk) 08:21, 21 November 2021 (UTC) At least three reliable indepedendent sources with significant coverage, ;p7ti. In my experience that's often the bit that people miss. "But surely [newspaper] is reliable?" "Yes, but if their article is mostly based on an interview or a press release, it's not independent, and doesn't contribute to notability". --ColinFine (talk) 09:58, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Official name for Malaysia language[edit] Why Wikipedia use unofficial name for Malaysia ?. "Malaysian" is not official name, you can see Malaysia articles 152  Malayan Law (talk) 11:27, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia uses the title most commonly used in English language sources, see WP:COMMONNAME. --David Biddulph (talk) 11:41, 21 November 2021 (UTC) HELP[edit] Can somebody please help me with my biography? I honestly don't know where to start, is there a questionnaire or an outline I can start with or work off of? Officialbosscuz (talk) 11:30, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Officialbosscuz (talk) 11:30, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Officialbosscuz Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Thanks for asking. Wikipedia is not a place for people to tell the world about themselves. Please read the autobiography policy. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about the person, showing how they meet Wikipedia's special definition of a notable person. It won't necessarily say what the subject wants it to say, and in fact most articles are typically written without any involvement from the subject. A Wikipedia article is not necessarily desirable, there are good reasons to not want one. If you meet the definition of a notable person, someone will eventually take note of you and choose to write about you. I would suggest that you allow that to play out and go on with your life and career. 331dot (talk) 11:41, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Officialbosscuz, if you prefer not to take 331dot's excellent advice, then at least create the draft in your "sandbox". (You've started it in your user page, which isn't for this purpose.) However, it's better just to do what 331dot says. -- Hoary (talk) 12:42, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Notability (music) describes how musicians qualify as notable. Many think they are notable, but WP:TOOSOON turns out to be true. David notMD (talk) 14:04, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Addition of sources to Myles Moylan page[edit] I would like to add two sources to Myles Moylan's Wiki page to support the fact that he was born in Tuam, Co Galway. "The Moylans of Tuam". JOTS (18): 42–55. Retrieved 17 November 2021. which traces the life and career of two Tuam men Myles Moylan and his nephew Bro Michael Titus Moylan (Superior General of the Christian Brothers (1900 - 1905) was published in the Journal of the Old Tuam Society (#18) last week. I would like to use this secondary source to support the fact that Myles was born in Tuam rather than Amesbury. I would also like to attach Myles Moylan's Findagrave page as a reference to his Tuam birth - "Myles Molan". Findgrave. Retrieved 21 November 2021. His Findagrave reference was cited before but was later deleted. For anybody who is researching Myles, it contains some primary records (which I know Wiki frowns upon) and also connections to his parents, some of his siblings and his nephew. Is there somebody out there who can oblige me and add those sources for me, please? BuffyO'B (talk) 13:26, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @BuffyO'B: Welcome to the teahouse. You can add sources using the "ref" tool near the bottom of the editing page you want to edit, and the ref tool should pop up on the screen, and then cite your web by citing: Empty citation (help) (filling the blanks in the editing page.) Also, if this does not help, you can also visit: Wikipedia:Tutorial (historical)/Citing sources. Severestorm28 (talk) 15:25, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Find-A-Grave not accepted as a reliable source reference because anyone can change content without editorial oversite. Can you find a published obituary? David notMD (talk) 17:58, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How can I contribute to Wikipedia page[edit]  Sunday Ezekiel ayiyi (talk) 14:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Welcome to the Teahouse, @Sunday Ezekiel ayiyi. You might wish to read Wikipedia:Contributing to Wikipedia and perhaps also try out our interactive tour called The Wikipedia Adventure. But I sense your frustration is that your receiving warnings about adding information that you have personally researched or studied, but which has not been formally published. The best way is to consider that Wikipedia is merely an encyclopaedia which collates and compiles information that has already been reliably published, then only that information should be added - not the details that you personally know, but which can't be checked up on by someone with access to a library or the internet on the other side of the world. We don't accept Original Research until it has been written about by others in independent sources such as books or periodicals. It is often best to learn how to contribute here by making small changes and improvements to articles first, before attempting major improvements. Starting with articles that you are not an expert in, or have strong views on, is by far the most sensible way to learn our ways. Because this is a collaborative project, we are all used to both being challenged as to why we've made some change, and also challenging others (always politely, of course). We work by consensus, so you might find making suggestions for big improvements or additions to an article are best made on that article's talk page, or you can directly ask an editor on their talk page why they decided something you added was not OK with them - and vice versa, of course. I hope this helps and that you aren't too put off at the start of your own Wikipedia Adventure. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 14:29, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Mikhail Kozlov (politician)[edit] Hi, I have recently created an article on a Russian politician that a user moved that page to a draft, which they might have a justified reason for the article to be moved in to a draft. I have added additional sources to that article to clear that submission into the main space. However, I am unable to submit it, because either a user did not add a submission button or there seemed to be a glitch. Can you find a way to fix that problem? Thanks. Ivan Milenin (talk) 14:26, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Ivan Milenin Welcome to the Teahouse. I'm sorry you had that problem, which I've now fixed for you. By editing and then adding "{{AfC submission/draft}}" to the top of the page, and then saving the edit, you get a Draft notice and a nice blue button to hit when you're ready to submit your article for review. Nick Moyes (talk) 14:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the help, always appreciated. Ivan Milenin (talk) 14:37, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to upload the logo for a walking trail[edit] Am a newcomer and have barely discovered how to edit text. Where will I discover how to upload an image so as to amend incorrect info in an entry please? Also, how do I key one tilde, let alone four, on a Mac keyboard please? Speysideway (talk) 16:05, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Speysideway and welcome to the Teahouse and to Wikipedia. It can be a bit tricky to start with to understand all the ins and outs of editing and following all our various policies and guidelines. (A bit like setting out on a mountain walk and not being able to find your way though the bl***y farmyard). So, I've left you one of our welcome messages with a few helpful links to get you navigating in the right direction. Now, regarding image uploads: whilst we normally advise images to be uploaded and released under an appropriate licence to Wikimedia Commons, I don't think that's advisable with a company logo or brand image, as the release permits commercial use of that logo by anyone else. So, instead, I'd advise taking a very low resolution version of that file and uploading it only to English Wikipedia (not Wikimedia Commons) under a non-free use licence. I've never actually done that myself, though I can point you to read more at Wikipedia:Non-free use rationale guideline. If, however, you simply want to replace an old image with a new one, such as File:Speyside Way logo.jpg, it should be even simpler! Simply scroll down that page to the bottom of the 'File History' section and click 'Upload a new version of this file'. There you can supply an up-to-date version fo the file (providing it is a very low resolution version). Regarding typing keyboard tildes: Typing four of them (~~~~) used to be the only way you could get your signature stamp inserted into the end of a post. However, providing you click the 'Reply' link to posts (rather than edit) - a very recent introduction to English Wikipedia - the software automatically signs and dates the post for you, so you don't have to bother. But a Google search fund me this which might help elsewhere. Finally, I do need to highlight one issue I see - and that's your username. Unfortunately, you might have unintentionally breached one of our policies of one person -one account. We don't really like seeing usernames which could suggest shared use of one logged in account, or one that represents and promotes an organisation or website (such as www.speysideway.co.uk). A better choice would have been something like SpeysidewayIan/Speyside Rambler etc etc. Not to worry immediately, but I'll drop by your userpage and let you know how to deal with that one. If you are connected with the Moray government's website, we'll also ask you to declare your connection to it on your userpage. We call that a Conflict of interest. We don't mind if you do work for them - we just need openness in declaring any WP:COI or WP:PAID connection before making more edits. I hope this is of some assistance to you. As an outdoors person myself, I'd be happy to help and encourage you to learn how to edit if you run into further difficulties. So feel free to contact me via my Talk page if you need a helping hand to get you going. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:37, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to hyperlink Wikipedia to other wiki sites[edit] I have a problem regarding linking of https://antwiki.org/wiki/Ophthalmopone_berthoudi. The Wiki says I have to write something like Ophthalmopone_berthoudi. But as you can see, the other wiki says the link does not exist. But if I do / Ophthalmopone_berthoudi then it works, but the text is messed up. Please read my source code to completely understand my question. Thanks in advance Imnotpathetic (talk) 16:21, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Imnotpathetic Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. I did look at a lot of your edits to Gamergate (ant) and I'm afraid you've made a couple of errors in your approach. So forgive me if I take the time to correct you so you don't do it again. Firstly, it would not be acceptable under any circumstances to link to a non-Wikimedia Foundation project via an external link in any article text. Such links to other wikis might be acceptable if used as part of a citation, and where that wiki was managed and maintained by an institution or repute. Most wikis are user-generated so not regarded as reliable as sources. Possibly a link in 'Further reading' or 'External links' might be justified, but I don't think the article even justifies that. Secondly, I noticed you have made lots of edits to that page removing redlinks to various species of ants in the article. This would only make sense if the name was linked two or more times. Every species on this earth is regarded as notable (see WP:SPECIESOUTCOMES), and so a redlink is quite appropriate. It will turn blue once a page for that taxon has been created which, I'm sure you appreciate, is useful. Not only does it currently flag up and encourage someone to write an article on that taxon, but it also then links to it once it's made. So I see no reason for either stripping out redlinks or adding external links as you wanted to. I hope this makes sense. regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 17:55, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I am truly sorry for the mess I made and thank you for reverting all that mess. But just say, I need to link to a External Link then how do I do it if the site does not work because it has a extra "/" in the URL? Is in not possible to link Wikipedia with such links? Thanks in advance. Imnotpathetic (talk) 19:24, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to add a reference text[edit] I have information on the the exact birth date of Joseph Otto Kesselring, I'm trying to add this in the reference area, and I've tried several ways none have worked. How do I add a reference? Gdwright (talk) 16:35, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Gdwright. Please see Help:Referencing for beginners.--Shantavira|feed me 17:34, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to edit the references[edit] Good morning I'm new and I'm learning now to edit here and I have a question how I can make a reference page that complies with the policies, try to make one here https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Alberto_Sosa and the I had done wrong, then I made the modifications and I would like if it is not a bother that they help me to learn and be able to continue in this world that I like a lot Seiyukaras (talk) 16:42, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Seiyukaras. The help I'm going to give you is the advice that I regularly give new editors who try straight away to do the most difficult thing there is in editing Wikipedia: creating a new article (would you try to build a house as your first ever building project? Would you play a solo recital after your first ever violin lesson?) My advice is to put aside that project for at least six months while you "learn the trade" of editing Wikipedia by making improvements to some of our existing six million articles. In the meantime you should read your first article, and also notability and referencing for beginners. I have some concerns about the image. You uploaded File:Alberto Sosa.jpg, claiming the author as Alberto Sosa and claiming it as your own work. Are you the photographer? If not, how are you claiming it as "own work"? If you are not the photographer (or somehow the copyright holder) then you are probably violating the photographer's copyright by purporting to grant an irrevocable licence to anybody in the world to copy, reuse, or modify that picture without requiring payment or permission, as long as they attribute its source (that is a summary of what you have done in uploading it). If you are the copyright holder, then you can legally do that, but is it what you intended? Furthermore, why did you say that the author of the work was Alberto Sosa? This seems very unlikely, as it doesn't look like a selfie. And following one from this: the fact that you uploaded the picture of Sosa implies that you know Sosa. If this is the case, you must read about editing with a conflict of interest. If you are in fact Sosa, then you should read autobiography to understand why you are very very strongly discouraged from writing about yourself on Wikipedia. Do see now why I advise you to put this aside for a while, as you have much to learn before you can successfully create an article? --ColinFine (talk) 18:19, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How do I reply directly to Nick Moyes?[edit] Can't find anywhere on your Talk page to post a reply. Keen to sort out accidental breach re username, also keen to disclose re possible conflict of interest but right now unable to find where to do things in what feels like a very alien environment. I am happy to pass facts direct to a relevant editor if that is more appropriate than my making changes direct andn am sorry if have inadvertently done the wrong thing, but I can assure you that the Wiki entry on Speyside Way was pointing to the wrong website and displaying the wrong logo. Can provide any number of references in support and don't mind if somebody else wants to fix it! Speysideway (talk) 16:53, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Speysideway: Welcome to the Teahouse. Just click on the "New section" link at the top of User talk:Nick Moyes to start writing something new. He'll get notified when that happens. Meanwhile, I'll just ping Nick Moyes here so that he knows. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 17:07, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Part of Nick's message: "The much simpler way is simply to abandon the account if it's breaching our rules, forget the password, and simply create another account with a username that's preferable. Any WP:COI/WP:PAID declarations can be made on the userpage of that new account, and you can also mention the name of your abandoned account so that there is some linkage remaining." Once you have opened a new account, and on that account's User page, declared your conflict of interest, ideally you cease from directly editing the article and instead propose specific changes on the Talk page of the article. David notMD (talk) 18:11, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to create a second sandbox?[edit] Hello, I've been using my sandbox as a way to keep track of notes for myself. However, I'd like to create a separate space to work on an entire article without actively doing that on the article itself or the article's talk page. Is is possible to create more sandboxes or somehow organize separate projects with my account? Thank you. WyldEys (talk) 17:16, 21 November 2021 (UTC) WyldEys Hello and welcome. You can create additional sandboxes by creating a link to one, say, User:WyldEys/sandbox 2. 331dot (talk) 17:20, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for the quick feedback! That also led me to the help page for Wikipedia:Subpages, and I didn't realize it was so simple. Thanks. WyldEys (talk) 17:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @WyldEys: You can generally create as many sandboxes as you like, everything starting with User:WyldEys/ will be in your user space. You can use the form below to quickly open the edit form for a new subpage. Hope this helps. Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 17:25, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Victor Schmidt mobil: This is extremely helpful, thank you. And the form makes it even simpler yet. Saving this for future use. WyldEys (talk) 17:34, 21 November 2021 (UTC) You can… use VisualEditor on this page?[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… Many pages on Wikipedia cannot use VisualEditor… or so I thought. Apparently, you can edit any page using VisualEditor by entering “https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/insert_your_title_here?veaction=edit”, and VisualEditor will load… have you ever tried this, or do you already know this? Like, as I speak here, I edited this page partially using VisualEditor. I’m kind of puzzled… — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 18:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I already knew this. However, this trick only works on pages that contain wikitext. Pages using a different contextmodel, such as pages containing javascript can't be edited with the Visual Editor, even when you try this trick (it simply won't load). Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 18:57, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @3PPYB6: It's somewhat known, but not effective when editing discussion pages like this one in my experience. I'd use either the WMF-sanctioned Reply Tool or Convenient Discussions, which offer a lot more utility. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 20:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Victor Schmidt mobil, @Tenryuu: Thanks for letting me know. I really would only think that the “hack” listed above is effective for Wikipedia: namespaces. So yeah, thank you. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 20:10, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Copypasting, when it isn't copyvio[edit] Hi Teahouse, I was just cleaning up Public Service Commission (Kenya), the biggest part of which is material copy-pasted from a webpage. The material is relevant, and I don't think it's a copyright violation to copy this if the source is cited. (But maybe it is - I admit that I'm not super familiar with how laws, etc are handled in this context. In that case I suppose someone could throw the whole thing into a block quote.) It's possible to condense this material (and omit parts), but not to paraphrase it. My questions are: does this need to go in a block quote on wikipedia (to avoid copyvio)? And, does this kind of information belong on wikipedia in this form in the first place? Or should it be significantly condensed to only its most important parts anyway? asilvering (talk) 18:55, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I can't verify this, as the alleged source suffers from an expired SSL certificate, however, crediting the source will not automatically mean it's not a copyright violation. The only time crediting the source would suffice is when the material in question is marked as a quote and it's not excessive. Courtesy ping Jmfbleak, who is one of the admins more experienced with handling copyvios. In future you might also want to ask these questions at WP:MCQ, since this is where the experts sit. Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 19:05, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Victor Schmidt mobil I did just verify it myself - I assure you it exists! It is certainly most of the page, but I do think laws and so forth tend to get handled differently than many other kinds of writing. Thanks for the WP:MCQ link! asilvering (talk) 19:12, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Writing a page on British Aviation during WWII[edit] Dear Wikipedia Teahouse. I am new to Wiki writing, and stumbling around a little on how best to proceed with an article. I have looked online for a related topic on this subject, but found that there is no pages that relate to listing and informing about the Aviation companies that were commissioned to design and produce Aircraft during WWII for the UK. There are lists of planes, but no article that discusses the companies or their factories, history, bombing during the war with images in one location. I would be very interested in doing this and having a map showing the location of the factories in the UK. It would be my first article and would be interested in doing a collaborative page if anyone is interested. Advice on how to proceed with a page, with recommendations would be appreciated. I am also interested in making a page on known locations of downed aircraft around the UK's waters. This one might be tricky, as I no of no sources so far that discuses this and may need a lot of research in newspapers. Thank you Chiefming1 (talk) 21:10, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Chiefming1. In general, the subject of a Wikipedia article is going to need to be something deemed to meet Wikipedia:Notability or one of Wikipedia's various subject-specific notability guidelines in order for it to avoid being deleted. The content contained therein is also going to need only reflect what has been written about it in reliable sources and not something based upon original research. For what it's worth, all Wikipedia articles are collaborative pages in a sense since nobody in particular really owns an article and contributions to the article can be made by anyone at anytime, but perhaps try asking about this at Wikipedia:WikiProject Military history since that's where you're likely going to find editors who are more familiar with this type of stuff. -- Marchjuly (talk) 22:04, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1056452197" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived CS1 errors: empty citation Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 21 November 2021, at 22:04 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH GreenMeansGo, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 How do I know if a page is full? 2 Autoconfirmed user 3 Template:Uw-create-kept 4 Please help review me for "Jaymark_215! 5 Audio sample 6 Article name problem 7 How do you use gadgets on other languages' Wikipedias? 8 What are the templates for "Year of the tiger" and "This user likes cats". 9 Is therese sources sufficient for an article? 10 Official name for Malaysia language 11 HELP 12 Addition of sources to Myles Moylan page 13 How can I contribute to Wikipedia page 14 Draft:Mikhail Kozlov (politician) 15 How to upload the logo for a walking trail 16 How to hyperlink Wikipedia to other wiki sites 17 How to add a reference text 18 How to edit the references 19 How do I reply directly to Nick Moyes? 20 How to create a second sandbox? 21 You can… use VisualEditor on this page? 22 Copypasting, when it isn't copyvio 23 Writing a page on British Aviation during WWII 24 AN/I not refreshing in app 25 How to create Article page for Musical Artist 26 section formatting 27 referencing content in a submitted article 28 Notability 29 Citing Manga 30 Problem with visual editor 31 How can I remove a website from spam or black list? 32 Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page 33 Verify my article and undelete it 34 "Can you plz help" 35 Sandbox 36 Biology 37 Help moving my draft 38 Paw partol 39 Reaching a consensus 40 I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page 41 Why i cant see my name on wikipedia?? 42 Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps 43 pokemon showdown 44 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath 45 I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ? 46 A Request to add Template to talk page 47 Is Imslp a good source to back up my information? 48 Vandalism 49 My Talk Archives vanished 50 Heading correction 51 Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search? 52 how do i seen how many edits i have 53 English 54 Science 55 Bold, Italics, or Quotes? 56 Visual Editing 57 Creating a page ethically 58 Text Allignment 59 Wiki Tables 60 Prime Healthcare 61 Disambiguation-links tag on redirects 62 Do anyone think like that? 63 Help with revision Most recent archives 1112, 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131 How do I know if a page is full?[edit] I thought I was getting proficient with Wikipedia, but lately, my edits have been consistently rejected. Wondering what to do and how to contribute more to pages of my interest. Smcupcake19 (talk) 01:34, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Smcupcake19: Wikipedia is not made of paper, so it doesn't really get "full". However, a brief look at your talk page shows that you have been involved in some long and heated debates about Scrappy-Doo and Draft:Scrappy-Doo Biography. Did you have specific questions about the advice that was given to you on those articles' talk pages, or questions about another aspect of editing Wikipedia? ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 01:47, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, the Scrappy debate was specifically where I wanted feedback. I truly do want to make that page look as good as I can; and I was specifically wondering what kinds of edits would be indubitably welcome, since after initial smooth sailing with my endeavor, as I mentioned above my edits now appear to be quickly deleted, even after making several attempts to compromise. After putting a special amount of effort to keep my most recent edit inoffensive and still finding it quickly deemed unacceptable. I'd just like to know how to make sure my edits can have some reliable permanence; doing so is becoming increasingly elusive.--Smcupcake19 (talk) 04:48, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Talk:Scrappy-Doo makes clear that your efforts on Scrappy-Doo and Draft:Scrappy-Doo Biography have run aground on various issues, including copyright and fancruft. I suggest you read Wikipedia:Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass and some of the links therein. Perhaps, after more than a year at this task, you consider other topics, animated or not. David notMD (talk) 10:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) With all due respect, my path is not singleminded. If there is anything that can be suggest for improving that page that would be acceptable, I'll take it. --Smcupcake19 (talk) 19:50, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Perhaps I should clarify my question: after losing an initial debate, I am constantly immediately having edits taken down despite attempts to compromise. Yes, it's my choice to focus on one page in particular but I am not clinging to the same debate that I was. What should I do if another editor immediately undoes my edit citing a policy I genuinely interpret differently/see counterarguments in other policies for?Smcupcake19 (talk) 01:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yep, @Patrick Vedel you should just close that and/or any other notes you might have and proceed to edit said article. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The sentences 2 - 5 are there in case they don't know about them. Faster than Thunder (talk) 06:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Please help review me for "Jaymark_215![edit] Can you please review for contributions? Smalemon (talk) 01:23, 21 November 2021 (UTC) User:"Jaymark 215 appears to have made close to 300 contributions since creating an account on 7 Nov 2021. Do you have a specific question? David notMD (talk) 03:27, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Possible sockpuppetry or meat farm? "Jaymark 215 has a history of editing several Pasay election results article that are also edited by user:JKLlamera and at least six IP addresses that start with 223.25.63. (83, 162, 101, etc.) as single purpose accounts. David notMD (talk) 03:40, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Example: 2013 Pasay local elections. David notMD (talk) 09:29, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Such IP's geolocate to the area of the Phillipines that includes Pasay. It's not surprising in itself that most of the people interested in editing an article about Pasay's local elections would come from that area, nor perhaps that some of them have little interest in editing anything else. I'm not saying that sockpuppetry isn't happening, but this seems to me to be, in isolation, weak evidence for it. {The poster formerly known as 87.81.230.195} 90.205.225.31 (talk) 19:39, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I found it suspicious that edits to this spate of articles, some about elections more then 10 years ago, mostly were done by multiple editors in Nov 2021. I still want to know why Smalemon raised the question in the first place. David notMD (talk) 05:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: & @Nick Moyes: thank you for guidance. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 07:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Article name problem[edit] I recently moved an article to change its name but the article does not show up on the Wikipedia search box when I type in its new name. Can someone tell me why this is happening and how I can fix it? Person077777777 (talk) 03:53, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Person077777777: Did you type in Competitive Pokémon Battling? It must be exactly the same as this. I guess you didn't use the "accented e"? If so, you can fix the problem by creating a redirect page named Competitive Pokemon Battling --Dragoniez (talk) 06:38, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How do you use gadgets on other languages' Wikipedias?[edit] Hi, I'm from the Japanese Wikipedia, and I'm looking for a way to import the strikethrough-blocked-users gadget (jawp doesn't have a setting for this in the preferences). I guess this is a matter of CSS, but I have no idea where I can find the original script. I would appreciate any help. -- Dragoniez (talk) 06:32, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dragoniez: Special:Gadgets lists the gadgets installed in a wiki. The source for this one is at MediaWiki:Gadget-markblocked.js, and it has instructions for importing it into another wiki by adding the code in lines 3 and 4 to your common.js in jawp. I haven't tried this, though. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 06:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh: Thanks a lot! It worked like a charm. --Dragoniez (talk) 06:58, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dragoniez: Oh, good to know! ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) What are the templates for "Year of the tiger" and "This user likes cats".[edit] I would like to add two userboxes to my page. So, I would like to know what the templates are for: • This User was born in the Year of the Tiger. • This User likes cats. ArtFlow29 (J.) (talk) 07:09, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @ArtFlow29 (J.) Welcome to the Teahouse. The templates you refer to are called userboxes. You can look through hundreds of them at Wikipedia:Userboxes/Galleries. They go on your userpage. But, at present, you have such a ridiculously huge image on your userpage that adding anything else would be pointless until you fix that - perhaps by inserting a |thumb| parameter. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 14:18, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for your very kind help! ArtFlow29 (J.) (talk) 19:50, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Is therese sources sufficient for an article?[edit] Hello, I am writing an article about a games studio. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Midoki) I searched on the internet and found these sources: http://midoki.com/ https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-32145285 Is these sources enough for this article? ;p7ti (talk) 08:16, 21 November 2021 (UTC) ;p7ti Hello and welcome. The website of the studio would be a primary source and not acceptable for establishing notability.(though it might be for some other things) The BBC source seems to be at least partially based on an interview with the founder of the company, though there might be some content there that could be used in an article. If you are submitting your draft for review, most reviewers look for at least three reliable sources with significant coverage. 331dot (talk) 08:21, 21 November 2021 (UTC) At least three reliable indepedendent sources with significant coverage, ;p7ti. In my experience that's often the bit that people miss. "But surely [newspaper] is reliable?" "Yes, but if their article is mostly based on an interview or a press release, it's not independent, and doesn't contribute to notability". --ColinFine (talk) 09:58, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Official name for Malaysia language[edit] Why Wikipedia use unofficial name for Malaysia ?. "Malaysian" is not official name, you can see Malaysia articles 152  Malayan Law (talk) 11:27, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia uses the title most commonly used in English language sources, see WP:COMMONNAME. --David Biddulph (talk) 11:41, 21 November 2021 (UTC) HELP[edit] Can somebody please help me with my biography? I honestly don't know where to start, is there a questionnaire or an outline I can start with or work off of? Officialbosscuz (talk) 11:30, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Officialbosscuz (talk) 11:30, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Officialbosscuz Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Thanks for asking. Wikipedia is not a place for people to tell the world about themselves. Please read the autobiography policy. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about the person, showing how they meet Wikipedia's special definition of a notable person. It won't necessarily say what the subject wants it to say, and in fact most articles are typically written without any involvement from the subject. A Wikipedia article is not necessarily desirable, there are good reasons to not want one. If you meet the definition of a notable person, someone will eventually take note of you and choose to write about you. I would suggest that you allow that to play out and go on with your life and career. 331dot (talk) 11:41, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Officialbosscuz, if you prefer not to take 331dot's excellent advice, then at least create the draft in your "sandbox". (You've started it in your user page, which isn't for this purpose.) However, it's better just to do what 331dot says. -- Hoary (talk) 12:42, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Notability (music) describes how musicians qualify as notable. Many think they are notable, but WP:TOOSOON turns out to be true. David notMD (talk) 14:04, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Addition of sources to Myles Moylan page[edit] I would like to add two sources to Myles Moylan's Wiki page to support the fact that he was born in Tuam, Co Galway. "The Moylans of Tuam". JOTS (18): 42–55. Retrieved 17 November 2021. which traces the life and career of two Tuam men Myles Moylan and his nephew Bro Michael Titus Moylan (Superior General of the Christian Brothers (1900 - 1905) was published in the Journal of the Old Tuam Society (#18) last week. I would like to use this secondary source to support the fact that Myles was born in Tuam rather than Amesbury. I would also like to attach Myles Moylan's Findagrave page as a reference to his Tuam birth - "Myles Molan". Findgrave. Retrieved 21 November 2021. His Findagrave reference was cited before but was later deleted. For anybody who is researching Myles, it contains some primary records (which I know Wiki frowns upon) and also connections to his parents, some of his siblings and his nephew. Is there somebody out there who can oblige me and add those sources for me, please? BuffyO'B (talk) 13:26, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @BuffyO'B: Welcome to the teahouse. You can add sources using the "ref" tool near the bottom of the editing page you want to edit, and the ref tool should pop up on the screen, and then cite your web by citing: Empty citation (help) (filling the blanks in the editing page.) Also, if this does not help, you can also visit: Wikipedia:Tutorial (historical)/Citing sources. Severestorm28 (talk) 15:25, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Find-A-Grave not accepted as a reliable source reference because anyone can change content without editorial oversite. Can you find a published obituary? David notMD (talk) 17:58, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How can I contribute to Wikipedia page[edit]  Sunday Ezekiel ayiyi (talk) 14:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Welcome to the Teahouse, @Sunday Ezekiel ayiyi. You might wish to read Wikipedia:Contributing to Wikipedia and perhaps also try out our interactive tour called The Wikipedia Adventure. But I sense your frustration is that your receiving warnings about adding information that you have personally researched or studied, but which has not been formally published. The best way is to consider that Wikipedia is merely an encyclopaedia which collates and compiles information that has already been reliably published, then only that information should be added - not the details that you personally know, but which can't be checked up on by someone with access to a library or the internet on the other side of the world. We don't accept Original Research until it has been written about by others in independent sources such as books or periodicals. It is often best to learn how to contribute here by making small changes and improvements to articles first, before attempting major improvements. Starting with articles that you are not an expert in, or have strong views on, is by far the most sensible way to learn our ways. Because this is a collaborative project, we are all used to both being challenged as to why we've made some change, and also challenging others (always politely, of course). We work by consensus, so you might find making suggestions for big improvements or additions to an article are best made on that article's talk page, or you can directly ask an editor on their talk page why they decided something you added was not OK with them - and vice versa, of course. I hope this helps and that you aren't too put off at the start of your own Wikipedia Adventure. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 14:29, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Mikhail Kozlov (politician)[edit] Hi, I have recently created an article on a Russian politician that a user moved that page to a draft, which they might have a justified reason for the article to be moved in to a draft. I have added additional sources to that article to clear that submission into the main space. However, I am unable to submit it, because either a user did not add a submission button or there seemed to be a glitch. Can you find a way to fix that problem? Thanks. Ivan Milenin (talk) 14:26, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Ivan Milenin Welcome to the Teahouse. I'm sorry you had that problem, which I've now fixed for you. By editing and then adding "{{AfC submission/draft}}" to the top of the page, and then saving the edit, you get a Draft notice and a nice blue button to hit when you're ready to submit your article for review. Nick Moyes (talk) 14:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the help, always appreciated. Ivan Milenin (talk) 14:37, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to upload the logo for a walking trail[edit] Am a newcomer and have barely discovered how to edit text. Where will I discover how to upload an image so as to amend incorrect info in an entry please? Also, how do I key one tilde, let alone four, on a Mac keyboard please? Speysideway (talk) 16:05, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Speysideway and welcome to the Teahouse and to Wikipedia. It can be a bit tricky to start with to understand all the ins and outs of editing and following all our various policies and guidelines. (A bit like setting out on a mountain walk and not being able to find your way though the bl***y farmyard). So, I've left you one of our welcome messages with a few helpful links to get you navigating in the right direction. Now, regarding image uploads: whilst we normally advise images to be uploaded and released under an appropriate licence to Wikimedia Commons, I don't think that's advisable with a company logo or brand image, as the release permits commercial use of that logo by anyone else. So, instead, I'd advise taking a very low resolution version of that file and uploading it only to English Wikipedia (not Wikimedia Commons) under a non-free use licence. I've never actually done that myself, though I can point you to read more at Wikipedia:Non-free use rationale guideline. If, however, you simply want to replace an old image with a new one, such as File:Speyside Way logo.jpg, it should be even simpler! Simply scroll down that page to the bottom of the 'File History' section and click 'Upload a new version of this file'. There you can supply an up-to-date version fo the file (providing it is a very low resolution version). Regarding typing keyboard tildes: Typing four of them (~~~~) used to be the only way you could get your signature stamp inserted into the end of a post. However, providing you click the 'Reply' link to posts (rather than edit) - a very recent introduction to English Wikipedia - the software automatically signs and dates the post for you, so you don't have to bother. But a Google search fund me this which might help elsewhere. Finally, I do need to highlight one issue I see - and that's your username. Unfortunately, you might have unintentionally breached one of our policies of one person -one account. We don't really like seeing usernames which could suggest shared use of one logged in account, or one that represents and promotes an organisation or website (such as www.speysideway.co.uk). A better choice would have been something like SpeysidewayIan/Speyside Rambler etc etc. Not to worry immediately, but I'll drop by your userpage and let you know how to deal with that one. If you are connected with the Moray government's website, we'll also ask you to declare your connection to it on your userpage. We call that a Conflict of interest. We don't mind if you do work for them - we just need openness in declaring any WP:COI or WP:PAID connection before making more edits. I hope this is of some assistance to you. As an outdoors person myself, I'd be happy to help and encourage you to learn how to edit if you run into further difficulties. So feel free to contact me via my Talk page if you need a helping hand to get you going. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:37, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to hyperlink Wikipedia to other wiki sites[edit] I have a problem regarding linking of https://antwiki.org/wiki/Ophthalmopone_berthoudi. The Wiki says I have to write something like Ophthalmopone_berthoudi. But as you can see, the other wiki says the link does not exist. But if I do / Ophthalmopone_berthoudi then it works, but the text is messed up. Please read my source code to completely understand my question. Thanks in advance Imnotpathetic (talk) 16:21, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Imnotpathetic Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. I did look at a lot of your edits to Gamergate (ant) and I'm afraid you've made a couple of errors in your approach. So forgive me if I take the time to correct you so you don't do it again. Firstly, it would not be acceptable under any circumstances to link to a non-Wikimedia Foundation project via an external link in any article text. Such links to other wikis might be acceptable if used as part of a citation, and where that wiki was managed and maintained by an institution or repute. Most wikis are user-generated so not regarded as reliable as sources. Possibly a link in 'Further reading' or 'External links' might be justified, but I don't think the article even justifies that. Secondly, I noticed you have made lots of edits to that page removing redlinks to various species of ants in the article. This would only make sense if the name was linked two or more times. Every species on this earth is regarded as notable (see WP:SPECIESOUTCOMES), and so a redlink is quite appropriate. It will turn blue once a page for that taxon has been created which, I'm sure you appreciate, is useful. Not only does it currently flag up and encourage someone to write an article on that taxon, but it also then links to it once it's made. So I see no reason for either stripping out redlinks or adding external links as you wanted to. I hope this makes sense. regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 17:55, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I am truly sorry for the mess I made and thank you for reverting all that mess. But just say, I need to link to a External Link then how do I do it if the site does not work because it has a extra "/" in the URL? Is in not possible to link Wikipedia with such links? Thanks in advance. Imnotpathetic (talk) 19:24, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Imnotpathetic Don't worry - it was easily fixed and the errors were made in genuine good faith. We all of us made lots of mistakes when we started editing - I defy anyone to say otherwise. Often it is making mistakes at the outset that gives us great skills in the future. Good luck with your own, personal Wikipedia Adventure. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:47, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to add a reference text[edit] I have information on the the exact birth date of Joseph Otto Kesselring, I'm trying to add this in the reference area, and I've tried several ways none have worked. How do I add a reference? Gdwright (talk) 16:35, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Gdwright. Please see Help:Referencing for beginners.--Shantavira|feed me 17:34, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to edit the references[edit] Good morning I'm new and I'm learning now to edit here and I have a question how I can make a reference page that complies with the policies, try to make one here https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Alberto_Sosa and the I had done wrong, then I made the modifications and I would like if it is not a bother that they help me to learn and be able to continue in this world that I like a lot Seiyukaras (talk) 16:42, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Seiyukaras. The help I'm going to give you is the advice that I regularly give new editors who try straight away to do the most difficult thing there is in editing Wikipedia: creating a new article (would you try to build a house as your first ever building project? Would you play a solo recital after your first ever violin lesson?) My advice is to put aside that project for at least six months while you "learn the trade" of editing Wikipedia by making improvements to some of our existing six million articles. In the meantime you should read your first article, and also notability and referencing for beginners. I have some concerns about the image. You uploaded File:Alberto Sosa.jpg, claiming the author as Alberto Sosa and claiming it as your own work. Are you the photographer? If not, how are you claiming it as "own work"? If you are not the photographer (or somehow the copyright holder) then you are probably violating the photographer's copyright by purporting to grant an irrevocable licence to anybody in the world to copy, reuse, or modify that picture without requiring payment or permission, as long as they attribute its source (that is a summary of what you have done in uploading it). If you are the copyright holder, then you can legally do that, but is it what you intended? Furthermore, why did you say that the author of the work was Alberto Sosa? This seems very unlikely, as it doesn't look like a selfie. And following one from this: the fact that you uploaded the picture of Sosa implies that you know Sosa. If this is the case, you must read about editing with a conflict of interest. If you are in fact Sosa, then you should read autobiography to understand why you are very very strongly discouraged from writing about yourself on Wikipedia. Do see now why I advise you to put this aside for a while, as you have much to learn before you can successfully create an article? --ColinFine (talk) 18:19, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How do I reply directly to Nick Moyes?[edit] Can't find anywhere on your Talk page to post a reply. Keen to sort out accidental breach re username, also keen to disclose re possible conflict of interest but right now unable to find where to do things in what feels like a very alien environment. I am happy to pass facts direct to a relevant editor if that is more appropriate than my making changes direct andn am sorry if have inadvertently done the wrong thing, but I can assure you that the Wiki entry on Speyside Way was pointing to the wrong website and displaying the wrong logo. Can provide any number of references in support and don't mind if somebody else wants to fix it! Speysideway (talk) 16:53, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Speysideway: Welcome to the Teahouse. Just click on the "New section" link at the top of User talk:Nick Moyes to start writing something new. He'll get notified when that happens. Meanwhile, I'll just ping Nick Moyes here so that he knows. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 17:07, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Part of Nick's message: "The much simpler way is simply to abandon the account if it's breaching our rules, forget the password, and simply create another account with a username that's preferable. Any WP:COI/WP:PAID declarations can be made on the userpage of that new account, and you can also mention the name of your abandoned account so that there is some linkage remaining." Once you have opened a new account, and on that account's User page, declared your conflict of interest, ideally you cease from directly editing the article and instead propose specific changes on the Talk page of the article. David notMD (talk) 18:11, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to create a second sandbox?[edit] Hello, I've been using my sandbox as a way to keep track of notes for myself. However, I'd like to create a separate space to work on an entire article without actively doing that on the article itself or the article's talk page. Is is possible to create more sandboxes or somehow organize separate projects with my account? Thank you. WyldEys (talk) 17:16, 21 November 2021 (UTC) WyldEys Hello and welcome. You can create additional sandboxes by creating a link to one, say, User:WyldEys/sandbox 2. 331dot (talk) 17:20, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for the quick feedback! That also led me to the help page for Wikipedia:Subpages, and I didn't realize it was so simple. Thanks. WyldEys (talk) 17:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @WyldEys: You can generally create as many sandboxes as you like, everything starting with User:WyldEys/ will be in your user space. You can use the form below to quickly open the edit form for a new subpage. Hope this helps. Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 17:25, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Victor Schmidt mobil: This is extremely helpful, thank you. And the form makes it even simpler yet. Saving this for future use. WyldEys (talk) 17:34, 21 November 2021 (UTC) You can… use VisualEditor on this page?[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… Many pages on Wikipedia cannot use VisualEditor… or so I thought. Apparently, you can edit any page using VisualEditor by entering “https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/insert_your_title_here?veaction=edit”, and VisualEditor will load… have you ever tried this, or do you already know this? Like, as I speak here, I edited this page partially using VisualEditor. I’m kind of puzzled… — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 18:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I already knew this. However, this trick only works on pages that contain wikitext. Pages using a different contextmodel, such as pages containing javascript can't be edited with the Visual Editor, even when you try this trick (it simply won't load). Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 18:57, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @3PPYB6: It's somewhat known, but not effective when editing discussion pages like this one in my experience. I'd use either the WMF-sanctioned Reply Tool or Convenient Discussions, which offer a lot more utility. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 20:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Victor Schmidt mobil, @Tenryuu: Thanks for letting me know. I really would only think that the “hack” listed above is effective for Wikipedia: namespaces. So yeah, thank you. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 20:10, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Copypasting, when it isn't copyvio[edit] Hi Teahouse, I was just cleaning up Public Service Commission (Kenya), the biggest part of which is material copy-pasted from a webpage. The material is relevant, and I don't think it's a copyright violation to copy this if the source is cited. (But maybe it is - I admit that I'm not super familiar with how laws, etc are handled in this context. In that case I suppose someone could throw the whole thing into a block quote.) It's possible to condense this material (and omit parts), but not to paraphrase it. My questions are: does this need to go in a block quote on wikipedia (to avoid copyvio)? And, does this kind of information belong on wikipedia in this form in the first place? Or should it be significantly condensed to only its most important parts anyway? asilvering (talk) 18:55, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I can't verify this, as the alleged source suffers from an expired SSL certificate, however, crediting the source will not automatically mean it's not a copyright violation. The only time crediting the source would suffice is when the material in question is marked as a quote and it's not excessive. Courtesy ping Jmfbleak, who is one of the admins more experienced with handling copyvios. In future you might also want to ask these questions at WP:MCQ, since this is where the experts sit. Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 19:05, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Victor Schmidt mobil I did just verify it myself - I assure you it exists! It is certainly most of the page, but I do think laws and so forth tend to get handled differently than many other kinds of writing. Thanks for the WP:MCQ link! asilvering (talk) 19:12, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Asilvering, copyright is a very important matter. But let's put it aside for a moment. Taking a wodge of somebody else's text and presenting it as if it were your own interpretation of what's written in a source that you scrupulously specify, and not text that you've taken from that source, is widely regarded as one form of plagiarism. (Indeed, I think it's universally regarded as one form of plagiarism, among people who care about plagiarism. Unfortunately it's clear that many people don't. But Wikipedia does.) -- Hoary (talk) 22:39, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I'm well aware of what plagiarism is. If you look at the linked article, you will see that "presenting it as if it were your own interpretation of what's written in a source" is not at all what is happening there; what's happening is an infodump. My question is about whether it is considered "unencyclopedic" or similar to quote extensively from laws etc in this way on Wikipedia. -- asilvering (talk) 04:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Sorry, asilvering, my "you" was primarily the impersonal "you", the informal equivalent of "one". I'd say that this infodump [good description] is "unencyclopedic", because (i) it's about what the Commission should do (or what it aspires to do) rather than what, according to reliable, independent sources, it does do (or neglects to do); (ii) its meaning will be pretty opaque to readers who aren't equipped with other sources on Kenyan law and to whom "Articles 171(2) and 230(2){b}" and the like will be meaningless; (iii) although it's obvious to you and me that it has simply been shoveled in from elsewhere, this won't be obvious to many readers who aren't familiar with Wikipedia, and it may be misunderstood as being written in Wikipedia's voice. The failure to point out that no, the text has been -- more or less (I haven't checked) -- shoveled straight in makes it a case of plagiarism. -- Hoary (talk) 04:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Writing a page on British Aviation during WWII[edit] Dear Wikipedia Teahouse. I am new to Wiki writing, and stumbling around a little on how best to proceed with an article. I have looked online for a related topic on this subject, but found that there is no pages that relate to listing and informing about the Aviation companies that were commissioned to design and produce Aircraft during WWII for the UK. There are lists of planes, but no article that discusses the companies or their factories, history, bombing during the war with images in one location. I would be very interested in doing this and having a map showing the location of the factories in the UK. It would be my first article and would be interested in doing a collaborative page if anyone is interested. Advice on how to proceed with a page, with recommendations would be appreciated. I am also interested in making a page on known locations of downed aircraft around the UK's waters. This one might be tricky, as I no of no sources so far that discuses this and may need a lot of research in newspapers. Thank you Chiefming1 (talk) 21:10, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Chiefming1. In general, the subject of a Wikipedia article is going to need to be something deemed to meet Wikipedia:Notability or one of Wikipedia's various subject-specific notability guidelines in order for it to avoid being deleted. The content contained therein is also going to need only reflect what has been written about it in reliable sources and not something based upon original research. For what it's worth, all Wikipedia articles are collaborative pages in a sense since nobody in particular really owns an article and contributions to the article can be made by anyone at anytime, but perhaps try asking about this at Wikipedia:WikiProject Military history since that's where you're likely going to find editors who are more familiar with this type of stuff. -- Marchjuly (talk) 22:04, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Chiefming1, I'm pretty sure that the relevant books by David Edgerton would provide, and cite, enough material for the former article. (Unfortunately I haven't read any of these. I've read, been enlightened by, and enjoyed, two books by him that aren't directly relevant.) -- Hoary (talk) 22:30, 21 November 2021 (UTC) AN/I not refreshing in app[edit] Tracked in Phabricator Task T274359 Sometimes I decide to browse AN/I, but I've found that it doesn't update in the mobile app, and is still on a revision from months ago. Does anyone know how to fix this? ??Plutonical?????? ?? ?? 22:31, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Well Wikipedia:Village Pump (the 'techincal' page) might be a place to report it. I have no idea why anyone would want to browse AN/I, though. There's a reason the shortcut link to it is WP:CESSPIT. ~Anachronist (talk) 22:43, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Nor why anyone would use the mobile app! Tried it once and deleted it shortly afterwards. Mobile view works fine in any browser. Nick Moyes (talk) 23:16, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Plutonical: This is a known issue, see phab:T274359. As far as I know, there's nothing you can do except switch to your browser. Suffusion of Yellow (talk) 23:21, 21 November 2021 (UTC) That task is languishing a little.. may be worth reporting the issue from in the app as well Plutonical, if only to float it nearer the top of the list ~TheresNoTime (to explain!) 23:44, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to create Article page for Musical Artist[edit]  Jasonseah69 (talk) 23:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69 Welcome to the Teahouse, and thank you for asking. Creating a Wikipedia article from scratch is the hardest task for anyone to achieve here - especially for a newcomer. Trying to write one about yourself is fraught with problems and issues, and will be seen as WP:PROMOTION. See our Conflict of Interest and AUTOBIOGRAPHY advice, too. But most of all, see WP:NMUSIC - this is a shortcut link to our essential Notability criteria for musicians. If you cannot find multiple, independent, in-depth sources that have written about you in detail (ignore your own PR output), and you don't meet any of the music notability criteria, then I'm afraid there's no chance. But if you feel you do meet those criteria, it's still best to leave it to someone who wants to write about you - not try to do it yourself. That person should then gain experience in editing here for some time, and then read This Guide on creating an article and submitting it for review through our Articles for Creation process, before it goes through our final 'New Page Review' process and is allowed to remain in the encyclopaedia. That's a brief outline of the process. Please do not attempt to use your Wikipedia WP:USERPAGE to write about yourself, or it will be deleted. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Good advice above. NB take "someone who wants to write about you" to mean "someone who, unprompted, wants to write about you". Not somebody asked (let alone paid) to do so. -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69: Welcome to the teahouse. You can create an article, or just submit using a draft for the Articles for Creation. However, if there aren't any sources, if may be deleted, so take your own risks for creating an article, or for less risks, create a draft. To create one, go to Wikipedia:Draft. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Severestorm28, please be aware that Jasonseah69 has only made three edits, is not autoconfirmed, and therefore cannot create an article directly. Also, their user page has been deleted as G11 - unambiguous advertising or promotion. Cullen328 (talk) 01:26, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cullen328: Next time-if someone is not autoconfirmed, and advertising, I'm giving them a warning. Thanks for the reminder. Severestorm28 (talk) 14:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) section formatting[edit] I had a draft reviewed and the reviewer suggested I use "==Section Formatting==". I cannot find any information on ==Section Formatting== on any of the help pages. Can someone send me a link which explains what ==Section Formatting== is and how to implement it? I appreciate the review and suggestions. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Looking at your draft, it's divided into headings using bold text titles, which isn't how articles are typically ordered here. If you replace the bold formatting on your section titles with two equals signs on either side, it'll create a more traditional section header for each title, which also then forces the page to create a table of contents and allows easier navigation. ??????? ? 00:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Thank You. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:47, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage COURTESY: Draft:Peebles Homestead You fixed that, but there are other problems. Several descriptive paragraphs have no references. Much of the content about his military service is general history, i.e., not about him (nor is it about the house). Hence, not relevant. David notMD (talk) 02:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) your draft has great promise. The section on the homestead today used one reference source three times, so I reformatted the citations so that the references are combined. You did a good job of finding references, can any of your sources be used for paragraphs that have no references? If not, where did you find the data about the house dimensions and construction details? If it was from a published source (such as a history book or local newspaper article) those can be used as a reference. Unfortunately, if it was from an unpublished source (such as handwritten notes found at a historical society) that would be considered original research and can't be used as a reference. You'll need to do some more work on your draft, but I'm sure it can be improved enough to be accepted. Keep up the good work. Karenthewriter (talk) 09:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Ownership gap between 1838 and 1994. David notMD (talk) 10:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) referencing content in a submitted article[edit] My recent biographical submission on Richard P. Novick was rejected because of insufficient referencing of content. Is there any way I can find out exactly which statements in the article require citations? I need a reply specific to working with the VisualEditor Spesshot (talk) 02:11, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have created versions of your proposed article at Draft:Richard Novick, User:Spesshot/sandbox and User:Spesshot/sandbox/Richard Novick. Pick one. For all, refs wrong place and wrong format. See Help:referencing for beginners. David notMD (talk) 02:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Notability[edit] I have a fringe topic I want to make an article for, but direct sources are really scarce. How can I tell if a source is a "High Quality" source in relation to Wikipedia guidelines? Baron Rea (talk) 04:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) also, can I make a page some sort of draft and have someone look over it? — Preceding unsigned comment added by Baron Rea (talk • contribs) 04:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, you can create a draft. However, before you try, here (in this thread, on this page), please specify the subject, and, if the best three sources are online, provide links to the best three. If you're not sure which are the best three, then the best five. If they're print sources, then please specify them, clearly. Then somebody here can evaluate your sources. -- Hoary (talk) 04:48, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Manga[edit] Hi, I'm new to Wikipedia. I am currently trying to figure out how to add a small detail to a page about Kennedy Space Center in Pop Culture. I'm wondering how I should cite the manga volumes of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure for the details I need. Should I use a pre-existing source on Wikipedia to the volumes that links to the publisher's website, or should i use the ISBN and author info as my citation? Cheese420 (talk) 04:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Author, book title, place, publisher, year, ISBN, and page number, Cheese420. And perhaps additional info besides, such as details of the original publication. -- Hoary (talk) 05:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cheese420 I'm going to disagree with @Hoary here. For a WP-pop cult section, you don't cite the manga, you cite a WP:RS that noticed that the manga had the KSC in it and bothered to write something about it, like at least some of the films are mentioned at [1]. Anything in that section without a decent secondary source should be removed. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) That would be better, yes. (But I'd rather got the impression that that was a lost cause.) If a secondary source comments on the pop culture item and one can cite the former, wouldn't the listing be more informative if publication details of the pop culture item itself were supplied as well? -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I will not object to adding primary source as well, but personally I wouldn't bother. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Compare, for example, Death Note at Donald Trump in popular culture. Warning, the DT article has some scary stuff. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Shocking stuff indeed, Gråbergs Gråa Sång. Not least the revelation that "Trump has an article on the online encyclopedia Wikipedia." (Well I never!) -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I may have to disagree here too, that does seem the least shocking item to me ;-) Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Problem with visual editor[edit] When I edit wikitables using Visual Editor, the tools doesn't work, I'm trying to edit a text within the table but whenever I tap the wikitable, it goes lock. Can anyone help me? Anyone? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 05:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Could you tell us which table in which article you're trying to edit? The most common cause that I can think of is that the table's cells are created with templates instead of the usual table syntax, but I have to see the table itself to know. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:46, 22 November 2021 (UTC) In filmography table. After seeing this problem, I've tried to edit in other device, but still not working. Maybe only mobile user can experience this problem. The Visual editor was okay before, it works well, but it is not working now. It's not a template, it's wikitable, could you please help me, I can't edit using visual editor—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 12:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) The question you were asked was "which table in which article"? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Blp articles, or almost all articles that has wikitable. I'm using VE until now because of referencing. But using VE to edit wikitables, doesn't work when using a mobile. The VE is working properly before—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 13:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) How can I remove a website from spam or black list?[edit] Hello I created a page in the sandbox and requested it to be reviewed. For this post, I used various sources, including a site, which I later found out it was blocked. Is it possible for me to request and remove the site from spam or blacklist? How? Also, is there a way to edit my written draft? AlexJan24 (talk) 06:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) hi AlexJan24! your draft is located at Draft:Bitumen penetration testing, feel free to input that in the search bar (including the Draft: prefix) to get to your draft. as for the blacklisted site, what source are you trying to use? theremay be a reason over at WP:RSP as to why it's blacklisted. if you want to add a whitelist for a page in there, you can hop over to MediaWiki talk:Spam-whitelist and request there to whitelist it for your article (but don't forget to read WP:Reliable sources first!). happy editing!  melecie  t - 06:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) thank you @Melecie! :) I want to use this URL: {infinitygalaxy.org/bitumen-penetration-test/} I am pretty sure that it has a good and reliable information. AlexJan24 (talk) 08:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @AlexJan24 This is a commercial website, and content like that is often placed on them to help promote their business and public perception. Can you not find something more academic and less dependent of one particular company? How about https://www.academia.edu/37842763/Penetration_Test_on_Bituminous_Materials ? Nick Moyes (talk) 10:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Nick Moyes, thank you for your suggestion! :) actually, the page you mentioned is good, but does not have the content I want. Moreover it is paid content not free. I am a petrochemical engineer. In fact, I have decided to write about such tests, which are very important and useful in the industry. As compared to other sites, I find this one to have more complete content. AlexJan24 (talk) 13:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page[edit] Hi guys I'm still feeling a bit lost. I have some factually updated text I would like to add to the BDR Thermea page. I have made my identity and intentions clear and being open, honest and upfront. There is no marketing-speak in the text. Please advise how I can place this new text. TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass: As said before, you should file an edit request on the talk page at Talk:BDR Thermea by following the instructions listed at {{Request edit}}. Even though you think the text is neutral, it may not be by Wikipedia's strict standards, so it'd still be better for more experienced editors to take a second look at it before it goes into the article. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 10:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass The best approach is to find the worst-offending sentences. For each one, create a new line and state: For [insert incorrect sentence here] please replace with ['insert better-worded sentence here] [add the url to a reliable source]. Then move on to the next issue and do the same. I fear you may have dumped a huge rewrite request on the talk page which I, for one, would not want to have to deal with. "Slowly slowly catchee monkey" as, I believe, they say. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Nick Moyes Thought I was making things easier for the editors! :) No harm intended. This is my thinking: Removed outdated text, updated facts and figures, and added a par on their new strategic focus. The company has undergone has lot of change since the original text was created. Have endeavoured to keep it short, sharp and factual and externally validated where I can. Still incorrect? I am no coder and find it really hard to navigate around Wikipedia. Sorry to be a bother but any help really appreciated.TracyMelass (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Verify my article and undelete it[edit]  Itswajidshaikh00 (talk) 11:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft_talk:Wajid_shaikh I see a draft whose text is "Hey team, i just created a page of living person autobiography with reliable sources and references citations kindly give me a hope to verifiy my new article". What I don't see is a biography of any kind. As for autobiographies, you're at the wrong website. -- Hoary (talk) 11:27, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have since been indefinitely blocked. You must succeed in appealing your block to have your account reinstated. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) FTR: Wikipedia:Sockpuppet investigations/Iwajidshaikh. --bonadea contributions talk 21:44, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Draft and article titles salted. Mjroots (talk) 11:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) "Can you plz help"[edit]  Priyanka9868 (talk) 11:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I HAVE TRIED SEVERAL TIME PUBLISHING CONTENT ON WIKIPEDIA BUT IT IS SHOWING PROMOTION CAN YOU PLZ HELP No need for capitals, Priyanka9868. Which article(s) or draft(s) are you asking about? -- Hoary (talk) 11:29, 22 November 2021 (UTC) This is the page Draft:Kapil Gupta — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868 (talk • contribs) 12:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Priyanka9868 Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about someone and their accomplishments. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about a person, showing how they meet the special Wikipedia definition of a notable person. Most of the sources in the draft seem to be interviews with the person, or simple biographical descriptions, not in depth, significant coverage of the person. Please see Your First Article. 331dot (talk) 12:14, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I quote the deleted draft: The company comes under IT Software ,Data Analytics , AI and IOT industries. At the very outset, OMLogic is not an marketing outsourcing company, but a strategic partner for your online marketing success. They offer a holistic “one-stop-shopping” solution for the internet marketing needs of clients. Within that, what does "strategic" add to "partner", what does "holistic" add to "one-stop-shopping", and why the "your" in "your online marketing success"? And Priyanka9868, you say that you have tried to publish this; but you have not. Or anyway "Priyanka9868" has not. Are you saying that you, Alex2321 and Sattu.pandey are all the same person? -- Hoary (talk) 12:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Also, are you related to Priyanka9868146? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) User:Alex2321 created the logo for CHES Special Risk that Priyanka9868146 used in Draft:CHES Special Risk. David notMD (talk) 15:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) No, we are not a same person. Actually he is one of my linkedin friend. I was not able to upload the logo of CHES Special Risk that why I have asked him to do so. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868146 (talk • contribs) 05:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Sandbox[edit] Hello is it possible to create an article if the first one you did has not yet been reviewed? how can I write on the sandbox if it only brings the draft I had done previously?Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Faith Buyaki, it is possible. Just create and use a new sandbox. You can do this by for example clicking on User:Faith Buyaki/sandbox 2 and using that. A different name is possible; just be sure that the name starts User:Faith Buyaki/. -- Hoary (talk) 13:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Biology[edit] Biologyassignments write briefly holozoic nutrition, parasitic nutrition, feeding mechanism in holozoic organisms. 105.112.176.163 (talk) 14:53, 22 November 2021 (UTC) We're not doing your coursework for you, and nor will the reference desks. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Holozoic nutrition exists as an under-referenced, Stub article. David notMD (talk) 15:40, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Help moving my draft[edit] Hi, I have created a draft, Draft:Angel Heredia, that I think is ready for review. Angel Heredia is already a Wikipedia page, so could someone with the needed rights move the draft to Draft:Angel Heredia (soccer) before I submit it for review? Thank you in advance! 73.162.91.15 (talk) 16:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you submit your draft for review and it is accepted, the reviewer will place it at the proper title. You may wish to leave a note on the draft talk page explaining the titling issue, though. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I went ahead and moved the draft (per Wikipedia:Naming conventions (sportspeople)#Association football (soccer)) to make it easier on the reviewer. DanCherek (talk) 16:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Paw partol[edit] Can someone help with gross of paw patrol the movie as acorrding to box office mojo it at $130M[1] 92.236.253.249 (talk) 17:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt11832046/  Courtesy link: PAW_Patrol:_The_Movie RudolfRed (talk) 18:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Reaching a consensus[edit] Hello, after many failures, I have explained why my edits should be accepted. Please share your opinion on these pages: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock Centrereded (talk) 17:41, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Centrereded. Your edits create the impression that your goal on Wikipedia is to make Marcelo Claure and Hans Georg Näder look bad. Cullen328 (talk) 18:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded: Reaching a consensus on an article talk page is much more difficult if the text that's proposed is long and consists of many sections. It is very unlikely that you will get a consensus in favour of what essentially amounts to "please restore all my edits", especially since the text you proposed to add is not quite neutral in tone. You received some very good advice and explanations of how the process works here; please take some time to read that and start a discussion about which specific points you think should be added to the article. Well-sourced criticism of individuals and companies can certainly be included in Wikipedia articles, but it has to be added in a neutral manner, and considering what is due weight. --bonadea contributions talk 20:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I also have no interest in the topics, but did see many comments that proposed refernces were not considered Wikipedia reliable source, and a general sense of 'piling on' rather than neutral point of view and appropriate length. You have been hammering at these articles since at least July, with for example, an attack-toned draft Draft:Hans Georg Näder. Why this deep and persistent interest in a draft and an article about German and Bolivian businessmen, respectively? David notMD (talk) 21:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 19:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @ACtiling, List of people from Merseyside? It's not locked or anything, you can edit it. Only add people that has a WP-article, preferably with a reference that supports that they belong on that page, see WP:TUTORIAL on how to add references. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:13, 22 November 2021 (UTC) WP:ADVENTURE can also be useful as an intro to Wikipedia. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You are on the verge of being blocked from making any edits to List of people from Merseyside. At the Administrators' Incidents board: "This is a newish editor, who is solely focussed on making changes to one article - List of people from Merseyside. They probably mean well. However, I have never before come across an editor who is so unable to listen to advice on basic editing skills - for example, they appear to believe that it's only possible to add a name to the list while removing one at the same time. They have been repeatedly advised, and occasionally warned, by several editors on numerous occasions, and directed to places like WP:Teahouse, but appear to be completely unable to comprehend what makes an edit allowable, and seem unwilling to learn. I would far prefer that they were not blocked but rather improve their skills - but sheer inability to achieve a modicum of competence appears to be an unresolvable problem. Any advice?" At issue, SPECIFICALLY, is that you are removing existing names for no valid reason, then inserting new names, but not consistent with the alphabetical order of the list. Stop removing names. Being a person from the past is not a valid reason to remove a name. Do not remove names. Stop removing names. REALLY. Or be blocked from ever editing this article again. David notMD (talk) 21:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Why i cant see my name on wikipedia??[edit] I have acted in a Bollywood movie as an lead actress, why i cant see myself on Wikipedia’s page 43.248.70.167 (talk) 22:07, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you meet the Wikipedia definition of a notable actress, you might merit an article, but it is strongly advised that you not attempt to write one yourself, see autobiography policy. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps[edit] Arbitrary merge to another page. Argonne was one of the only 13 founding corps of Drum Corps International in 1972. An editor (with no drum corps background) arbitrarily merged this page into a defunt D & B page. Argonne should hold it's own page because of it's historical significance. Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Argonne73. Please stop edit warring: that is regarded as disruptive, and may get you blocked. We get that you believe that there should be a separate article about Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps; but several experienced editors have disagreed with you, and nobody (including you) has argued for its retention at WP:Articles for deletion/Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps. Wikipedia works by consensus: if you think a change should be made (or not be made) it is up to you to persuade other editors according to Wikipedia's policies. A core policy is notability: it is not enough for a subject to be "of historical significance" (or popular, important, famous, influential or several other characteristics which would contribute to notability out in the world): in Wikipedia we use the word in a special sense, which mostly comes down to "are there enough reliably published sources, wholly independent of the subject, and containing significant coverage of the subject, to base an article on?" Several editors have expressed their opinion that the existing article does not establish this. If you want the article retained it is up to you to persuade other editors that there are adequate sources to establish (which means, finding such sources) that it meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. --ColinFine (talk) 22:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) pokemon showdown[edit] how do i find pokemon showdown ifo here DMPenguin (talk) 00:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) DMPenguin (talk) there is one sentence about Pokémon Showdown in the "Fan community" section of the Pokémon article. If you are able to find good published references about Pokémon Showdown you can expand the article's coverage on that topic. Karenthewriter (talk) 00:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi DMPenguin! there's also a small section on rules used by smogon, the community(?) that hosts pokémon showdown over at Pokémon_competitive_play#Smogon if you want to check that or help over there. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:56, 23 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath[edit] Hi there - can someone help me with my inline citations / footnotes? I am putting up my first wiki page submission and have feedback to improve this area - but unsure what else i need to do to meet criteria. Feedback on my new page appreciated: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath Claire Leaf (talk) 03:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Three points. First, an index number ("<ref> ... </ref>") comes immediately after a comma, period, etc; not before it. Secondly, you can (and most drafts should) reuse references: ("<ref name="XYZ">full details</ref>" for the first instance, "<ref name="XYZ" />" for each subsequent instance, where "XYZ" is something distinctive). Thirdly, for any reference, you format a link something like this Author, "[https://www.example.com/blah.blahblah/blah.html Title of the web page]", Website, date. Retrieved date. -- Hoary (talk) 03:14, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Claire Leaf. Please read Referencing for beginners. There are many techniques for creating useful references. What they all have in common is that uninformative bare URLs are not displayed, but instead text based references are displayed, which include all of the relevant bibliographic details of the reference. Things like title, author, publication or publisher, date of publication, page numbers, ISBN numbers for books, and the like. Cullen328 (talk) 03:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I fixed some of the references, but in doing so, discovered that the draft as submitted is a close paraphrasing of reference #2: https://leafie.org/seizurerescuebreath/. Reword, so that the text is in your own word rather than sentences verbatim. As for the refs I did not fix, the above link shows how to convert URLs to valid refs. There remains one other problem that may b insurmountable. Wikipedia requires that for health articles, refs meet criteria described at WP:MEDRS. The refs you have do not appear to be sufficient, i.e., not review articles of multiple clinical trials. David notMD (talk) 03:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ?[edit]  Ayaelmelegy (talk) 04:06, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Ayaelmelegy, I took a quick look at the first of these. It has 13 references, but there's no indication of which of the 13 is a reference for which part of the draft. Additionally, each of the 13 is just a "bare URL". Please see the section immediately above for how to improve the references. -- Hoary (talk) 04:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Second one, drafts also URLs. David notMD (talk) 05:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) A Request to add Template to talk page[edit] As a new Wikipedia user, I always wondered how to add Template like example NoACEMM to a User talk. Moreno Ardan1 (talk) 3:18, 23 November 2021 FYI?– Removed duplicate signature As the message on your talk page suggests, you can just add {{NoACEMM}} to your own talk page. Templates usually belong to the top of talk pages. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:25, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is Imslp a good source to back up my information?[edit] Ok so I want to edit Dolores Paterno because it says there that the original lyrics were in Spanish and translated by Levi Celerio which is not true because the original sheet music from 1880 already had Tagalog lyrics and Levi Celerio added another version of lyrics.(since the original song was published before Levi was born) I don't know other sources but the sheet music in Imslp.com that explains this. Isangtaosamundo (talk) 08:28, 23 November 2021 (UTC) In your place, I'd (i) add {{Dubious|date=November 2021}} immediately after the sentence The lyrics were translated from Spanish into Tagalog by the Filipino National Artist Levi Celerio; and (ii) raise the matter on Talk:Dolores Paterno. In the latter, give your reasons for saying that it's not true. I'm unfamiliar with imslp.com; in its current state, I have to say that it looks like mere junk. Can you perhaps retrieve an earlier, reliable version from the Wayback Machine? If so, give the title and URL of the relevant page. Feel free to cite other reliable sources (books, journals) even if they haven't been reproduced on the web and aren't downloadable. -- Hoary (talk) 10:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism[edit] Hi, I wanted to know the precise difference between blatant and subtle vandalism. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:34, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! basically subtle vandalism is vandalism where there is an attempt to make it seem real or otherwise hide it from others, for example changing a date to "21 April" which may seem real until further inspection instead of something obviously fake such as "420 January" such as the case with blatant vandalism. other such cases are, from the page linked, are adding plausible misinformation to articles (such as minor alteration of facts or additions of plausible-sounding hoaxes), hiding vandalism (such as by making two bad edits and reverting only one), simultaneously using multiple accounts or IP addresses to vandalize, abuse of maintenance and deletion templates, or reverting legitimate edits with the intent of hindering the improvement of pages. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a bunch @Melecie. But still I want some help. Can you tell me what type of vandalism the two edits are in page Warfaze, which I reverted moments back. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) it may be one of those edits that fall in between, like if you understand bengali it would probably be visible that it's an attempt at vandalism, while if you don't it could be understood as an attempt to add something constructively to a page.  melecie  t - 10:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Archives vanished[edit] I went to my own Talk to archive discussions, only to see that my previously created archives have vanished. Any idea what happened? David notMD (talk) 11:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Nevermind. Tracked it down to a self-inflicted deletion of "Talk header"" months ago. David notMD (talk) 11:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Heading correction[edit] How do i correct a spelling on the heading? i added an unwanted letter on the heading and need to remove it . How do i do it.  11:19, 23 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by ChabbieCee (talk • contribs) ChabbieCee, you edit a regular heading (such as "Heading correction" for this thread) just as you edit other text. As for the titles of articles or other pages, you need to "move" a page to its new title. So if you realize that the name you want for Ms Nerwande is Elisabeth (with an "s"), you view the page User:ChabbieCee/Elizabeth Nerwande, click on the option to move it, specify User:ChabbieCee/Elisabeth Nerwande, give your reason for the move, and say (i) yes you want to move any talk page there may be (if there's no talk page, no matter), and (ii) yes there should be a redirect from the old name to the new one. -- Hoary (talk) 11:42, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search?[edit] I created a draft about a dance collective called FlucT Draft:FlucT. When I do a search for "fluct" on Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?search=fluct&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go&ns0=1, the draft doesn't show up. This concerns me because I fear someone else may start an article on FlucT not realizing there is already a draft. Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen To search for a draft, you must put "Draft:" in front of the draft title. Keep in mind that users are not under any obligation to first search for a draft if they want to directly create an article. I have added the submission template to your draft so you can submit it. 331dot (talk) 11:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) 331dot thanks, I probably understood that. I just wonder if it's a good policy, because some editors may not know they have to put draft: in front, miss my draft, create their own draft, then there seems to be a duplication of effort that feels needless? Greg Dahlen (talk) 13:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Greg Dahlen, and welcome to the Teahouse. You can always open a discussion on this sort of issue at the Village pump. But in my view there are good reasons for the way it is. The Wikipedia that the public sees is six million encyclopaedia articles: nothing else. That's all that is indexed by external search engines, and that's all that the Wikipedia search box gives you unless you tell it otherwise. All the rest - talk pages, drafts, user pages, projects pages, policies, essays, etc, are "under the bonnet", seen only by those who choose to look inside. --ColinFine (talk) 13:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) how do i seen how many edits i have[edit] how do i see how many edits i have thanks DMPenguin (talk) 13:05, 23 November 2021 (UTC) By clicking this link. -- Hoary (talk) 13:23, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DMPenguin. Just in case you're wondering where the link that Hoary mentioned above can be found, just go to your user page in in the left-hand sidebar click on "User contributions" in the "Tools" section. Then, scroll all the way down to the very bottom of the page and click on "Edit count". That's where you'll find the aforementioned link. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:30, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I go to the little toolbar (Talk, Sandbox, Preferences, Beta, Watchlist, Contributions, Log out) that's to the left of my username, which is above any Wikipedia article I'm viewing when logged in. I click on Preferences and my number of edits is shown. That's what I see on an aging Mac laptop, when using Safari as a browser, but you may see something different on your computer. Karenthewriter (talk) 17:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) English[edit] What is a tea house? 41.114.234.36 (talk) 13:32, 23 November 2021 (UTC) On Wikipedia it is a friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia. Theroadislong (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Science[edit] How do you make a tealeaf 41.190.245.5 (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. This is intended to be a friendly place for getting help in using and editing Wikipedia: for general knowledge questions, the reference desk is a better place; or often, you can look at one of our six million articles, such as tea processing. --ColinFine (talk) 14:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Bold, Italics, or Quotes?[edit] I'm writing my first ever article from scratch, albeit I've written essays for practically empty existing articles many times before, so I know what I'm doing. One thing I'm never sure about however, is when to use bold, italics and "quotations." Although I know that "quotations" are used on songs. I'm at one of those situations now, while writing about some early appearances of a former footballer turned rapper. I'm mentioning and referencing a few of the Youtube channel's he appeared on, but as they don't have Wikipedia articles like SB.TV, Mixtape Madness, Link Up TV and GRM Daily do, I'm wondering whether I should put the channel names in bold, italics or "quotations"? Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Visual Editing[edit] Hi, can anybody out here tell me how I can visually edit a table, as in this page. I could figure out how I can add a new row below a specific row, but could not figure out how to change the sl. no of all the following rows, after adding a new row. I could now answer the edit request on that talk page, not only because I could not do it, but because the edit request had not provided relevant details. Anyway, can anyone please tell me the procedure of doing it. For example, consider the following. I want to add a new row after 7th row. And add new details. So what is the procedure, using visual editing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible It's a two step process, involving both Visual Editor and Source Editor. I have copied the source code from the article into my Sandbox as it's too risky playing around with tables directly - and especially as this is just a demo. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 (Note that my edit summary links to the source page where the authors are credited - do this even in your sandbox please, as we need to credit other people's work when we upload it, as it isn't really ours to claim as our own) You'll see I have added my very own, well-known and highly-popular YouTube Channel to a newly inserted row at position 8. You should do that bit most easily in Visual Editor by Selecting Row 7, clicking the Chevron button that appears on the far left of the table and selecting Insert below. Now type in all the information/data that you can, obviously numbering this as Row 8. Ignore the fact that text is not aligned, you'll fix that in the next step. Now save your edits (Publish Changes) then go back in, but via Edit Source so that you're editing the wikimarkup.Do not use VE. Find the row with the newly added data. (Tip: use Ctrl-F to search for my surname, so you're taken straight there.) Find the line containing the position number '8' that you added. It will look likethis: |8 Copy and paste the style command from an existing centred cell and paste it in so it looks like this: | style="text-align:center" |8 Preview it to check it's centred, and repeat elsewhere as necessary. For flags and so forth, find an exisiting row contining what you need and paste that in to the empty cell (also within Source Editor, not in VE) Finally, you will now have to manually edit every subsequent row so that the row number shifts up one to accommodate the newly-inserted row. (You cannot do this automatically as you might using Excel.) It should take you just a few minutes to fix this. I stopped at fixing this at row 20, which is why there are two rows numbered 20 in my demo. Again, don't use VE for this step. Please visit this Help page to appreciate what you can do in Visual Editor and all its limitations. You can't, for example, change colours with VE - you must use source editor. The 1st line of that section I linked to mentions a 'Phabricator' list of tasks to improve VE. Follow it to appreciate what can and can't yet be done. See https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T108245 Whilst you might be frustrated that you can't do everything in Visual Editor, just remember that this tool was devised to make basic editing simpler and more WYSIWYG for beginners. Experienced editors generally tend to avoid Visual Editor and prefer using Source Editor. You are now asking about very complex editing, where either only Source Editor or a combination of both editing tools will be necessary. I hope this all makes sense. Please ping me know when you've done with the stuff in my Sandbox, and I'll then delete the content from it. Nick Moyes (talk) 16:49, 23 November 2021 (UTC) PS: Another little tip for you: Enter as much data as you can in VE. If you can't add what you want, leave some placeholder text like aaaa bbbb ccccc etc in its place. This make it much, much easier to find the right cell to edit late in Source Editor/wikimarkup. Cheers, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:54, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Creating a page ethically[edit] Creating a page for my boss My boss is adamant that she wants a Wikipedia account (she's a prominent science communication researcher). I think she probably deserves one, but I'm also deeply aware that I'm biased as a prospective page author. Does anyone have any advice for me? I want to make my boss happy, but not by violating Wikipedia guidelines. Lorikie (talk) 14:26, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: You'll need to read and abide by Wikipedia:Conflict of interest. DuncanHill (talk) 14:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lorikie, and welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for being up-front about your situation. Unfortunately, there are some formidable obstacles in the way of you being able to satisfy your boss. As Duncan says, you need to read up about conflict of interest, and further, you need to make the formal declarations that you are a paid editor (it doesn't matter if you are specifically paid to do this, from what you say it is part of your job). Next, you need to drop the idea of "deserving a page", because that assumes that a Wikipedia article is in any way for the benefit of its subject. Of course many people (and other entities) do get some benefit frrom there being a Wikipedia article about them, but that is incidental: Wikipedia has no such purpose, and indeed is indifferent as to whether the subject wants an article about them or does not want an article about them. An article about your boss will not belong to her, will not be under her control, will not necessarily say what she wants it to say, and should be based almost entirely on what people wholly unconnected with her have chosen to publish about her (good or bad!) and not on what she or her associates say or want to say. You might like to show her an article about yourself isn't necessarily a good thing. The counterpart of "deserve" that Wikipedia actually uses is, "does the subject meet Wikipedia's criteria for notability? This is not directly related to prominence, importance, influence, popularity, or any of the other things that you might normally connect with "notability": in essence it is a question of whether there are enough reliably published sources, wholly unconnected with the subject to base an article on. If you and she decide that you still want there to be an article, there are more hurdles. Creating a new article is much more difficult than it looks - I liken it to building a house as your first building project, or playing a public recital after your first violin lesson, and always advise new editors to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" and how Wikipedia works. Editors who do not heed this advice often have a frustrating time as they put in a lot of work and don't understand why their house keeps falling down. Having a conflict of interest you will likely find it even harder, as you will need to basically forget everything you know about your boss, and summarise only what those independent commentators have published. If you decide to go ahead, you need to read your first article, and then use the articles for creation process to create a draft. --ColinFine (talk) 14:57, 23 November 2021 (UTC) If pressed to proceed by your boss, see if there are three or more published articles about her - content at length, not just a name-mention - and then use guidance at Help:Referencing for beginners to create references in proper ref format in your Sandbox. If you cannot find publications about her, then the effort is futile. David notMD (talk) 15:52, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Text Allignment[edit] Any idea on text alignment in table. I want to center align some text in tables, using visual editor. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:44, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible I think you'd probably need to use wikisource code for that, using the "text-align:center; parameter. PS: I've tweaked the demo warning you placed on your sandbox page as you'd left the nowiki commands in which stop it from working. So the warning now looks like it's come from me, but obviously isn't a real vandalism warning. The best way to leave warnings is to enable WP:TWINKLE in your Preferences. Then it does it automatically for you via menu options, plus a whole lot more. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Tables[edit] Today I was editing random articles, when I came across Nach Baliye. I was reading the article, trying to find for any errors, when I came across this table [2]. I just sort of went mad seeing this table. Just a well formatted and advanced table, with all the color schemes, and just nice cell merging. Can anyone, for heaven's sake tell me how that table was created with all those attractive features. I don't really think that the Wiki markup was typed out. There must be some modern graphical interface, for doing such a tedious thing. I want to know how that table was created. I would really be glad, if I get the answer from someone who is an expert in this matter, and has been editing Wikipedia for a couple of years, because, I want the exact and precise method of creating such a table. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:58, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I've been editing for over 10 years and wouldn't dare to create such a thing. I have, however, created very long data tables by starting in Excel, getting all the sorting, the text and the wikilinks and in the right places before exporting it with a tool to Wikimarkup. But I'm not aware of a tool to make tables look pretty like that - so I shall await for answers from other users more experienced in such things, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: It takes work, often over time with improvements by different editors, often starting with copying the format from another page. The first similar table in the article was added by an IP here with edit summary "added table like other shows Jhalak". That may refer to Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart or an earlier season. It could maybe be tracked further back but I haven't tried. Help:Table has general help but it's complicated. Much of it is the same or similar as HTML tables which some editors already know. PrimeHunter (talk) 16:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Prime Healthcare[edit] My interest in CAlifornia health systems drew me to Prime Healthcare, where I was struck by the difference in how Wiki editors handle the material. Whereas large systems such as Sutter and Kaiser are given the opportunity to list history, background, hospital names, etc, Prime's editing history is aggressive and heavy handed. The result is a page listing controversy and nothing else. Prime owns 45 hospitals nationwide, employs 50000 people, but you wouldn't know it by Wiki. BTW I am in no way affiliated or compensated by Prime; my research is for a graduate program. I'm just amazed at the discrepancy and poor treatment. I haven't researched it enough to determine whether sources should be improved on deleted materials, but that is different than what edit history shows. Any attempts to improve the page are immediately deleted wholesale, in apparent violation of Wiki editing rules. (I attempted to undo some edits myself) Can anyone explain this? Prime owner Prem Reddy has made a number of enemies with his handling of labor, etc. Is that at play here? Archie515 (talk) 16:46, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Prime Healthcare Services Karenthewriter (talk) 17:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Archie515. Welcome to the Teahouse! You can discuss the issue about the content of the article on the article's talk page. The concerned editors might engage in the conversation and help you in finding a possible solution. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 17:24, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Disambiguation-links tag on redirects[edit] In this edit I intentionally changed a redirect from targeting an article to targeting a disambiguation page. To my surprise, the "adding disambiguation links" tag was added. In a way, it makes sense (I added a link to a disambiguation page), but on the other hand, the tag is probably meant for when someone adds a link in an article without knowing it's a disambiguation page, like if I added a link to Georgia or Mercury in an article. Can something be changed so that this tagging isn't activated when the end result of the edit is a redirect? I reported this at WP:EF/FP but was sent here for a reason I don't understand: the responding editor said both that the tag isn't activated and that it's working properly. 72.77.45.188 (talk) 17:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The edit filter (which interdicts edits) is separate from the tagging system (which describes what an edit is). —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 17:38, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Do anyone think like that?[edit] Are there people actually thinking that this page represents a universal and unbiased point of view? Owerthise (talk) 18:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I think like that. It doesn't seem biased to me. What direction do you think it's biased in? Maproom (talk) 18:43, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think there is such a thing as an universal point of view, certainly not about a topic connected to religion. It looks neutral to me; it may not be perfect (no article is) but there are no obvious problems. --bonadea contributions talk 19:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Help with revision[edit] Hello! I'm trying to revise the first two paragraphs of the Cultural context section of Cueva de las Manos and I need help with it. I've already put in a copy edit request for the whole page with the Guild of Copyeditors, but I was wondering if there was a group/person willing to help with this particular section in the meantime. I'm trying to revise the section in accordance with the following advice of FunkMonk in the talk page: There is some repetition in how you describe the paintings were returned to and were influential for the people throughout many thousands of years, perhaps check if someone of it can be consolidated or made less similar. If anyone would be willing to lend a hand in this respect it would be much appreciated. If there is a better place to ask for such help, I would be grateful if someone could point me there. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Best, Tyrone Madera (talk) 18:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) This might be better for the Talk Page, but one possible way to consolidate this might be to write this instead, which combines two separate statements: However, that so many people contributed to the artwork for thousands of years suggests the cave held great significance for the artists, with earlier groups influencing later ones through a continuous narrative, playing out over millennia. But that's just one possibility. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 18:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1056819105" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived CS1 errors: empty citation Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 19:02 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH GreenMeansGo, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 How do I know if a page is full? 2 Autoconfirmed user 3 Template:Uw-create-kept 4 Please help review me for "Jaymark_215! 5 Audio sample 6 Article name problem 7 How do you use gadgets on other languages' Wikipedias? 8 What are the templates for "Year of the tiger" and "This user likes cats". 9 Is therese sources sufficient for an article? 10 Official name for Malaysia language 11 HELP 12 Addition of sources to Myles Moylan page 13 How can I contribute to Wikipedia page 14 Draft:Mikhail Kozlov (politician) 15 How to upload the logo for a walking trail 16 How to hyperlink Wikipedia to other wiki sites 17 How to add a reference text 18 How to edit the references 19 How do I reply directly to Nick Moyes? 20 How to create a second sandbox? 21 You can… use VisualEditor on this page? 22 Copypasting, when it isn't copyvio 23 Writing a page on British Aviation during WWII 24 AN/I not refreshing in app 25 How to create Article page for Musical Artist 26 section formatting 27 referencing content in a submitted article 28 Notability 29 Citing Manga 30 Problem with visual editor 31 How can I remove a website from spam or black list? 32 Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page 33 Verify my article and undelete it 34 "Can you plz help" 35 Sandbox 36 Biology 37 Help moving my draft 38 Paw partol 39 Reaching a consensus 40 I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page 41 Why i cant see my name on wikipedia?? 42 Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps 43 pokemon showdown 44 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath 45 I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ? 46 A Request to add Template to talk page 47 Is Imslp a good source to back up my information? 48 Vandalism 49 My Talk Archives vanished 50 Heading correction 51 Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search? 52 how do i seen how many edits i have 53 English 54 Science 55 Bold, Italics, or Quotes? 56 Visual Editing 57 Creating a page ethically 58 Text Allignment 59 Wiki Tables 60 Prime Healthcare 61 Disambiguation-links tag on redirects 62 Do anyone think like that? 63 Help with revision Most recent archives 1112, 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131 How do I know if a page is full?[edit] I thought I was getting proficient with Wikipedia, but lately, my edits have been consistently rejected. Wondering what to do and how to contribute more to pages of my interest. Smcupcake19 (talk) 01:34, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Smcupcake19: Wikipedia is not made of paper, so it doesn't really get "full". However, a brief look at your talk page shows that you have been involved in some long and heated debates about Scrappy-Doo and Draft:Scrappy-Doo Biography. Did you have specific questions about the advice that was given to you on those articles' talk pages, or questions about another aspect of editing Wikipedia? ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 01:47, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, the Scrappy debate was specifically where I wanted feedback. I truly do want to make that page look as good as I can; and I was specifically wondering what kinds of edits would be indubitably welcome, since after initial smooth sailing with my endeavor, as I mentioned above my edits now appear to be quickly deleted, even after making several attempts to compromise. After putting a special amount of effort to keep my most recent edit inoffensive and still finding it quickly deemed unacceptable. I'd just like to know how to make sure my edits can have some reliable permanence; doing so is becoming increasingly elusive.--Smcupcake19 (talk) 04:48, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Talk:Scrappy-Doo makes clear that your efforts on Scrappy-Doo and Draft:Scrappy-Doo Biography have run aground on various issues, including copyright and fancruft. I suggest you read Wikipedia:Drop the stick and back slowly away from the horse carcass and some of the links therein. Perhaps, after more than a year at this task, you consider other topics, animated or not. David notMD (talk) 10:07, 20 November 2021 (UTC) With all due respect, my path is not singleminded. If there is anything that can be suggest for improving that page that would be acceptable, I'll take it. --Smcupcake19 (talk) 19:50, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Perhaps I should clarify my question: after losing an initial debate, I am constantly immediately having edits taken down despite attempts to compromise. Yes, it's my choice to focus on one page in particular but I am not clinging to the same debate that I was. What should I do if another editor immediately undoes my edit citing a policy I genuinely interpret differently/see counterarguments in other policies for?Smcupcake19 (talk) 01:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yep, @Patrick Vedel you should just close that and/or any other notes you might have and proceed to edit said article. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The sentences 2 - 5 are there in case they don't know about them. Faster than Thunder (talk) 06:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Please help review me for "Jaymark_215![edit] Can you please review for contributions? Smalemon (talk) 01:23, 21 November 2021 (UTC) User:"Jaymark 215 appears to have made close to 300 contributions since creating an account on 7 Nov 2021. Do you have a specific question? David notMD (talk) 03:27, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Possible sockpuppetry or meat farm? "Jaymark 215 has a history of editing several Pasay election results article that are also edited by user:JKLlamera and at least six IP addresses that start with 223.25.63. (83, 162, 101, etc.) as single purpose accounts. David notMD (talk) 03:40, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Example: 2013 Pasay local elections. David notMD (talk) 09:29, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Such IP's geolocate to the area of the Phillipines that includes Pasay. It's not surprising in itself that most of the people interested in editing an article about Pasay's local elections would come from that area, nor perhaps that some of them have little interest in editing anything else. I'm not saying that sockpuppetry isn't happening, but this seems to me to be, in isolation, weak evidence for it. {The poster formerly known as 87.81.230.195} 90.205.225.31 (talk) 19:39, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I found it suspicious that edits to this spate of articles, some about elections more then 10 years ago, mostly were done by multiple editors in Nov 2021. I still want to know why Smalemon raised the question in the first place. David notMD (talk) 05:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: & @Nick Moyes: thank you for guidance. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 07:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Article name problem[edit] I recently moved an article to change its name but the article does not show up on the Wikipedia search box when I type in its new name. Can someone tell me why this is happening and how I can fix it? Person077777777 (talk) 03:53, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Person077777777: Did you type in Competitive Pokémon Battling? It must be exactly the same as this. I guess you didn't use the "accented e"? If so, you can fix the problem by creating a redirect page named Competitive Pokemon Battling --Dragoniez (talk) 06:38, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How do you use gadgets on other languages' Wikipedias?[edit] Hi, I'm from the Japanese Wikipedia, and I'm looking for a way to import the strikethrough-blocked-users gadget (jawp doesn't have a setting for this in the preferences). I guess this is a matter of CSS, but I have no idea where I can find the original script. I would appreciate any help. -- Dragoniez (talk) 06:32, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dragoniez: Special:Gadgets lists the gadgets installed in a wiki. The source for this one is at MediaWiki:Gadget-markblocked.js, and it has instructions for importing it into another wiki by adding the code in lines 3 and 4 to your common.js in jawp. I haven't tried this, though. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 06:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @ClaudineChionh: Thanks a lot! It worked like a charm. --Dragoniez (talk) 06:58, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dragoniez: Oh, good to know! ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 07:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) What are the templates for "Year of the tiger" and "This user likes cats".[edit] I would like to add two userboxes to my page. So, I would like to know what the templates are for: • This User was born in the Year of the Tiger. • This User likes cats. ArtFlow29 (J.) (talk) 07:09, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @ArtFlow29 (J.) Welcome to the Teahouse. The templates you refer to are called userboxes. You can look through hundreds of them at Wikipedia:Userboxes/Galleries. They go on your userpage. But, at present, you have such a ridiculously huge image on your userpage that adding anything else would be pointless until you fix that - perhaps by inserting a |thumb| parameter. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 14:18, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for your very kind help! ArtFlow29 (J.) (talk) 19:50, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Is therese sources sufficient for an article?[edit] Hello, I am writing an article about a games studio. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Midoki) I searched on the internet and found these sources: http://midoki.com/ https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-32145285 Is these sources enough for this article? ;p7ti (talk) 08:16, 21 November 2021 (UTC) ;p7ti Hello and welcome. The website of the studio would be a primary source and not acceptable for establishing notability.(though it might be for some other things) The BBC source seems to be at least partially based on an interview with the founder of the company, though there might be some content there that could be used in an article. If you are submitting your draft for review, most reviewers look for at least three reliable sources with significant coverage. 331dot (talk) 08:21, 21 November 2021 (UTC) At least three reliable indepedendent sources with significant coverage, ;p7ti. In my experience that's often the bit that people miss. "But surely [newspaper] is reliable?" "Yes, but if their article is mostly based on an interview or a press release, it's not independent, and doesn't contribute to notability". --ColinFine (talk) 09:58, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Official name for Malaysia language[edit] Why Wikipedia use unofficial name for Malaysia ?. "Malaysian" is not official name, you can see Malaysia articles 152  Malayan Law (talk) 11:27, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia uses the title most commonly used in English language sources, see WP:COMMONNAME. --David Biddulph (talk) 11:41, 21 November 2021 (UTC) HELP[edit] Can somebody please help me with my biography? I honestly don't know where to start, is there a questionnaire or an outline I can start with or work off of? Officialbosscuz (talk) 11:30, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Officialbosscuz (talk) 11:30, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Officialbosscuz Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Thanks for asking. Wikipedia is not a place for people to tell the world about themselves. Please read the autobiography policy. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about the person, showing how they meet Wikipedia's special definition of a notable person. It won't necessarily say what the subject wants it to say, and in fact most articles are typically written without any involvement from the subject. A Wikipedia article is not necessarily desirable, there are good reasons to not want one. If you meet the definition of a notable person, someone will eventually take note of you and choose to write about you. I would suggest that you allow that to play out and go on with your life and career. 331dot (talk) 11:41, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Officialbosscuz, if you prefer not to take 331dot's excellent advice, then at least create the draft in your "sandbox". (You've started it in your user page, which isn't for this purpose.) However, it's better just to do what 331dot says. -- Hoary (talk) 12:42, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Notability (music) describes how musicians qualify as notable. Many think they are notable, but WP:TOOSOON turns out to be true. David notMD (talk) 14:04, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Addition of sources to Myles Moylan page[edit] I would like to add two sources to Myles Moylan's Wiki page to support the fact that he was born in Tuam, Co Galway. "The Moylans of Tuam". JOTS (18): 42–55. Retrieved 17 November 2021. which traces the life and career of two Tuam men Myles Moylan and his nephew Bro Michael Titus Moylan (Superior General of the Christian Brothers (1900 - 1905) was published in the Journal of the Old Tuam Society (#18) last week. I would like to use this secondary source to support the fact that Myles was born in Tuam rather than Amesbury. I would also like to attach Myles Moylan's Findagrave page as a reference to his Tuam birth - "Myles Molan". Findgrave. Retrieved 21 November 2021. His Findagrave reference was cited before but was later deleted. For anybody who is researching Myles, it contains some primary records (which I know Wiki frowns upon) and also connections to his parents, some of his siblings and his nephew. Is there somebody out there who can oblige me and add those sources for me, please? BuffyO'B (talk) 13:26, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @BuffyO'B: Welcome to the teahouse. You can add sources using the "ref" tool near the bottom of the editing page you want to edit, and the ref tool should pop up on the screen, and then cite your web by citing: Empty citation (help) (filling the blanks in the editing page.) Also, if this does not help, you can also visit: Wikipedia:Tutorial (historical)/Citing sources. Severestorm28 (talk) 15:25, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Find-A-Grave not accepted as a reliable source reference because anyone can change content without editorial oversite. Can you find a published obituary? David notMD (talk) 17:58, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How can I contribute to Wikipedia page[edit]  Sunday Ezekiel ayiyi (talk) 14:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Welcome to the Teahouse, @Sunday Ezekiel ayiyi. You might wish to read Wikipedia:Contributing to Wikipedia and perhaps also try out our interactive tour called The Wikipedia Adventure. But I sense your frustration is that your receiving warnings about adding information that you have personally researched or studied, but which has not been formally published. The best way is to consider that Wikipedia is merely an encyclopaedia which collates and compiles information that has already been reliably published, then only that information should be added - not the details that you personally know, but which can't be checked up on by someone with access to a library or the internet on the other side of the world. We don't accept Original Research until it has been written about by others in independent sources such as books or periodicals. It is often best to learn how to contribute here by making small changes and improvements to articles first, before attempting major improvements. Starting with articles that you are not an expert in, or have strong views on, is by far the most sensible way to learn our ways. Because this is a collaborative project, we are all used to both being challenged as to why we've made some change, and also challenging others (always politely, of course). We work by consensus, so you might find making suggestions for big improvements or additions to an article are best made on that article's talk page, or you can directly ask an editor on their talk page why they decided something you added was not OK with them - and vice versa, of course. I hope this helps and that you aren't too put off at the start of your own Wikipedia Adventure. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 14:29, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Mikhail Kozlov (politician)[edit] Hi, I have recently created an article on a Russian politician that a user moved that page to a draft, which they might have a justified reason for the article to be moved in to a draft. I have added additional sources to that article to clear that submission into the main space. However, I am unable to submit it, because either a user did not add a submission button or there seemed to be a glitch. Can you find a way to fix that problem? Thanks. Ivan Milenin (talk) 14:26, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Ivan Milenin Welcome to the Teahouse. I'm sorry you had that problem, which I've now fixed for you. By editing and then adding "{{AfC submission/draft}}" to the top of the page, and then saving the edit, you get a Draft notice and a nice blue button to hit when you're ready to submit your article for review. Nick Moyes (talk) 14:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the help, always appreciated. Ivan Milenin (talk) 14:37, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to upload the logo for a walking trail[edit] Am a newcomer and have barely discovered how to edit text. Where will I discover how to upload an image so as to amend incorrect info in an entry please? Also, how do I key one tilde, let alone four, on a Mac keyboard please? Speysideway (talk) 16:05, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Speysideway and welcome to the Teahouse and to Wikipedia. It can be a bit tricky to start with to understand all the ins and outs of editing and following all our various policies and guidelines. (A bit like setting out on a mountain walk and not being able to find your way though the bl***y farmyard). So, I've left you one of our welcome messages with a few helpful links to get you navigating in the right direction. Now, regarding image uploads: whilst we normally advise images to be uploaded and released under an appropriate licence to Wikimedia Commons, I don't think that's advisable with a company logo or brand image, as the release permits commercial use of that logo by anyone else. So, instead, I'd advise taking a very low resolution version of that file and uploading it only to English Wikipedia (not Wikimedia Commons) under a non-free use licence. I've never actually done that myself, though I can point you to read more at Wikipedia:Non-free use rationale guideline. If, however, you simply want to replace an old image with a new one, such as File:Speyside Way logo.jpg, it should be even simpler! Simply scroll down that page to the bottom of the 'File History' section and click 'Upload a new version of this file'. There you can supply an up-to-date version fo the file (providing it is a very low resolution version). Regarding typing keyboard tildes: Typing four of them (~~~~) used to be the only way you could get your signature stamp inserted into the end of a post. However, providing you click the 'Reply' link to posts (rather than edit) - a very recent introduction to English Wikipedia - the software automatically signs and dates the post for you, so you don't have to bother. But a Google search fund me this which might help elsewhere. Finally, I do need to highlight one issue I see - and that's your username. Unfortunately, you might have unintentionally breached one of our policies of one person -one account. We don't really like seeing usernames which could suggest shared use of one logged in account, or one that represents and promotes an organisation or website (such as www.speysideway.co.uk). A better choice would have been something like SpeysidewayIan/Speyside Rambler etc etc. Not to worry immediately, but I'll drop by your userpage and let you know how to deal with that one. If you are connected with the Moray government's website, we'll also ask you to declare your connection to it on your userpage. We call that a Conflict of interest. We don't mind if you do work for them - we just need openness in declaring any WP:COI or WP:PAID connection before making more edits. I hope this is of some assistance to you. As an outdoors person myself, I'd be happy to help and encourage you to learn how to edit if you run into further difficulties. So feel free to contact me via my Talk page if you need a helping hand to get you going. Regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:37, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to hyperlink Wikipedia to other wiki sites[edit] I have a problem regarding linking of https://antwiki.org/wiki/Ophthalmopone_berthoudi. The Wiki says I have to write something like Ophthalmopone_berthoudi. But as you can see, the other wiki says the link does not exist. But if I do / Ophthalmopone_berthoudi then it works, but the text is messed up. Please read my source code to completely understand my question. Thanks in advance Imnotpathetic (talk) 16:21, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Imnotpathetic Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. I did look at a lot of your edits to Gamergate (ant) and I'm afraid you've made a couple of errors in your approach. So forgive me if I take the time to correct you so you don't do it again. Firstly, it would not be acceptable under any circumstances to link to a non-Wikimedia Foundation project via an external link in any article text. Such links to other wikis might be acceptable if used as part of a citation, and where that wiki was managed and maintained by an institution or repute. Most wikis are user-generated so not regarded as reliable as sources. Possibly a link in 'Further reading' or 'External links' might be justified, but I don't think the article even justifies that. Secondly, I noticed you have made lots of edits to that page removing redlinks to various species of ants in the article. This would only make sense if the name was linked two or more times. Every species on this earth is regarded as notable (see WP:SPECIESOUTCOMES), and so a redlink is quite appropriate. It will turn blue once a page for that taxon has been created which, I'm sure you appreciate, is useful. Not only does it currently flag up and encourage someone to write an article on that taxon, but it also then links to it once it's made. So I see no reason for either stripping out redlinks or adding external links as you wanted to. I hope this makes sense. regards, Nick Moyes (talk) 17:55, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I am truly sorry for the mess I made and thank you for reverting all that mess. But just say, I need to link to a External Link then how do I do it if the site does not work because it has a extra "/" in the URL? Is in not possible to link Wikipedia with such links? Thanks in advance. Imnotpathetic (talk) 19:24, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Imnotpathetic Don't worry - it was easily fixed and the errors were made in genuine good faith. We all of us made lots of mistakes when we started editing - I defy anyone to say otherwise. Often it is making mistakes at the outset that gives us great skills in the future. Good luck with your own, personal Wikipedia Adventure. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:47, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to add a reference text[edit] I have information on the the exact birth date of Joseph Otto Kesselring, I'm trying to add this in the reference area, and I've tried several ways none have worked. How do I add a reference? Gdwright (talk) 16:35, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Gdwright. Please see Help:Referencing for beginners.--Shantavira|feed me 17:34, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to edit the references[edit] Good morning I'm new and I'm learning now to edit here and I have a question how I can make a reference page that complies with the policies, try to make one here https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Alberto_Sosa and the I had done wrong, then I made the modifications and I would like if it is not a bother that they help me to learn and be able to continue in this world that I like a lot Seiyukaras (talk) 16:42, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Seiyukaras. The help I'm going to give you is the advice that I regularly give new editors who try straight away to do the most difficult thing there is in editing Wikipedia: creating a new article (would you try to build a house as your first ever building project? Would you play a solo recital after your first ever violin lesson?) My advice is to put aside that project for at least six months while you "learn the trade" of editing Wikipedia by making improvements to some of our existing six million articles. In the meantime you should read your first article, and also notability and referencing for beginners. I have some concerns about the image. You uploaded File:Alberto Sosa.jpg, claiming the author as Alberto Sosa and claiming it as your own work. Are you the photographer? If not, how are you claiming it as "own work"? If you are not the photographer (or somehow the copyright holder) then you are probably violating the photographer's copyright by purporting to grant an irrevocable licence to anybody in the world to copy, reuse, or modify that picture without requiring payment or permission, as long as they attribute its source (that is a summary of what you have done in uploading it). If you are the copyright holder, then you can legally do that, but is it what you intended? Furthermore, why did you say that the author of the work was Alberto Sosa? This seems very unlikely, as it doesn't look like a selfie. And following one from this: the fact that you uploaded the picture of Sosa implies that you know Sosa. If this is the case, you must read about editing with a conflict of interest. If you are in fact Sosa, then you should read autobiography to understand why you are very very strongly discouraged from writing about yourself on Wikipedia. Do see now why I advise you to put this aside for a while, as you have much to learn before you can successfully create an article? --ColinFine (talk) 18:19, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How do I reply directly to Nick Moyes?[edit] Can't find anywhere on your Talk page to post a reply. Keen to sort out accidental breach re username, also keen to disclose re possible conflict of interest but right now unable to find where to do things in what feels like a very alien environment. I am happy to pass facts direct to a relevant editor if that is more appropriate than my making changes direct andn am sorry if have inadvertently done the wrong thing, but I can assure you that the Wiki entry on Speyside Way was pointing to the wrong website and displaying the wrong logo. Can provide any number of references in support and don't mind if somebody else wants to fix it! Speysideway (talk) 16:53, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Speysideway: Welcome to the Teahouse. Just click on the "New section" link at the top of User talk:Nick Moyes to start writing something new. He'll get notified when that happens. Meanwhile, I'll just ping Nick Moyes here so that he knows. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 17:07, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Part of Nick's message: "The much simpler way is simply to abandon the account if it's breaching our rules, forget the password, and simply create another account with a username that's preferable. Any WP:COI/WP:PAID declarations can be made on the userpage of that new account, and you can also mention the name of your abandoned account so that there is some linkage remaining." Once you have opened a new account, and on that account's User page, declared your conflict of interest, ideally you cease from directly editing the article and instead propose specific changes on the Talk page of the article. David notMD (talk) 18:11, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to create a second sandbox?[edit] Hello, I've been using my sandbox as a way to keep track of notes for myself. However, I'd like to create a separate space to work on an entire article without actively doing that on the article itself or the article's talk page. Is is possible to create more sandboxes or somehow organize separate projects with my account? Thank you. WyldEys (talk) 17:16, 21 November 2021 (UTC) WyldEys Hello and welcome. You can create additional sandboxes by creating a link to one, say, User:WyldEys/sandbox 2. 331dot (talk) 17:20, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you for the quick feedback! That also led me to the help page for Wikipedia:Subpages, and I didn't realize it was so simple. Thanks. WyldEys (talk) 17:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @WyldEys: You can generally create as many sandboxes as you like, everything starting with User:WyldEys/ will be in your user space. You can use the form below to quickly open the edit form for a new subpage. Hope this helps. Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 17:25, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Victor Schmidt mobil: This is extremely helpful, thank you. And the form makes it even simpler yet. Saving this for future use. WyldEys (talk) 17:34, 21 November 2021 (UTC) You can… use VisualEditor on this page?[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… Many pages on Wikipedia cannot use VisualEditor… or so I thought. Apparently, you can edit any page using VisualEditor by entering “https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/insert_your_title_here?veaction=edit”, and VisualEditor will load… have you ever tried this, or do you already know this? Like, as I speak here, I edited this page partially using VisualEditor. I’m kind of puzzled… — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 18:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I already knew this. However, this trick only works on pages that contain wikitext. Pages using a different contextmodel, such as pages containing javascript can't be edited with the Visual Editor, even when you try this trick (it simply won't load). Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 18:57, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @3PPYB6: It's somewhat known, but not effective when editing discussion pages like this one in my experience. I'd use either the WMF-sanctioned Reply Tool or Convenient Discussions, which offer a lot more utility. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 20:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Victor Schmidt mobil, @Tenryuu: Thanks for letting me know. I really would only think that the “hack” listed above is effective for Wikipedia: namespaces. So yeah, thank you. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 20:10, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Copypasting, when it isn't copyvio[edit] Hi Teahouse, I was just cleaning up Public Service Commission (Kenya), the biggest part of which is material copy-pasted from a webpage. The material is relevant, and I don't think it's a copyright violation to copy this if the source is cited. (But maybe it is - I admit that I'm not super familiar with how laws, etc are handled in this context. In that case I suppose someone could throw the whole thing into a block quote.) It's possible to condense this material (and omit parts), but not to paraphrase it. My questions are: does this need to go in a block quote on wikipedia (to avoid copyvio)? And, does this kind of information belong on wikipedia in this form in the first place? Or should it be significantly condensed to only its most important parts anyway? asilvering (talk) 18:55, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I can't verify this, as the alleged source suffers from an expired SSL certificate, however, crediting the source will not automatically mean it's not a copyright violation. The only time crediting the source would suffice is when the material in question is marked as a quote and it's not excessive. Courtesy ping Jmfbleak, who is one of the admins more experienced with handling copyvios. In future you might also want to ask these questions at WP:MCQ, since this is where the experts sit. Victor Schmidt mobil (talk) 19:05, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Victor Schmidt mobil I did just verify it myself - I assure you it exists! It is certainly most of the page, but I do think laws and so forth tend to get handled differently than many other kinds of writing. Thanks for the WP:MCQ link! asilvering (talk) 19:12, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Asilvering, copyright is a very important matter. But let's put it aside for a moment. Taking a wodge of somebody else's text and presenting it as if it were your own interpretation of what's written in a source that you scrupulously specify, and not text that you've taken from that source, is widely regarded as one form of plagiarism. (Indeed, I think it's universally regarded as one form of plagiarism, among people who care about plagiarism. Unfortunately it's clear that many people don't. But Wikipedia does.) -- Hoary (talk) 22:39, 21 November 2021 (UTC) I'm well aware of what plagiarism is. If you look at the linked article, you will see that "presenting it as if it were your own interpretation of what's written in a source" is not at all what is happening there; what's happening is an infodump. My question is about whether it is considered "unencyclopedic" or similar to quote extensively from laws etc in this way on Wikipedia. -- asilvering (talk) 04:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Sorry, asilvering, my "you" was primarily the impersonal "you", the informal equivalent of "one". I'd say that this infodump [good description] is "unencyclopedic", because (i) it's about what the Commission should do (or what it aspires to do) rather than what, according to reliable, independent sources, it does do (or neglects to do); (ii) its meaning will be pretty opaque to readers who aren't equipped with other sources on Kenyan law and to whom "Articles 171(2) and 230(2){b}" and the like will be meaningless; (iii) although it's obvious to you and me that it has simply been shoveled in from elsewhere, this won't be obvious to many readers who aren't familiar with Wikipedia, and it may be misunderstood as being written in Wikipedia's voice. The failure to point out that no, the text has been -- more or less (I haven't checked) -- shoveled straight in makes it a case of plagiarism. -- Hoary (talk) 04:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Writing a page on British Aviation during WWII[edit] Dear Wikipedia Teahouse. I am new to Wiki writing, and stumbling around a little on how best to proceed with an article. I have looked online for a related topic on this subject, but found that there is no pages that relate to listing and informing about the Aviation companies that were commissioned to design and produce Aircraft during WWII for the UK. There are lists of planes, but no article that discusses the companies or their factories, history, bombing during the war with images in one location. I would be very interested in doing this and having a map showing the location of the factories in the UK. It would be my first article and would be interested in doing a collaborative page if anyone is interested. Advice on how to proceed with a page, with recommendations would be appreciated. I am also interested in making a page on known locations of downed aircraft around the UK's waters. This one might be tricky, as I no of no sources so far that discuses this and may need a lot of research in newspapers. Thank you Chiefming1 (talk) 21:10, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Chiefming1. In general, the subject of a Wikipedia article is going to need to be something deemed to meet Wikipedia:Notability or one of Wikipedia's various subject-specific notability guidelines in order for it to avoid being deleted. The content contained therein is also going to need only reflect what has been written about it in reliable sources and not something based upon original research. For what it's worth, all Wikipedia articles are collaborative pages in a sense since nobody in particular really owns an article and contributions to the article can be made by anyone at anytime, but perhaps try asking about this at Wikipedia:WikiProject Military history since that's where you're likely going to find editors who are more familiar with this type of stuff. -- Marchjuly (talk) 22:04, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Chiefming1, I'm pretty sure that the relevant books by David Edgerton would provide, and cite, enough material for the former article. (Unfortunately I haven't read any of these. I've read, been enlightened by, and enjoyed, two books by him that aren't directly relevant.) -- Hoary (talk) 22:30, 21 November 2021 (UTC) AN/I not refreshing in app[edit] Tracked in Phabricator Task T274359 Sometimes I decide to browse AN/I, but I've found that it doesn't update in the mobile app, and is still on a revision from months ago. Does anyone know how to fix this? ??Plutonical?????? ?? ?? 22:31, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Well Wikipedia:Village Pump (the 'techincal' page) might be a place to report it. I have no idea why anyone would want to browse AN/I, though. There's a reason the shortcut link to it is WP:CESSPIT. ~Anachronist (talk) 22:43, 21 November 2021 (UTC) Nor why anyone would use the mobile app! Tried it once and deleted it shortly afterwards. Mobile view works fine in any browser. Nick Moyes (talk) 23:16, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Plutonical: This is a known issue, see phab:T274359. As far as I know, there's nothing you can do except switch to your browser. Suffusion of Yellow (talk) 23:21, 21 November 2021 (UTC) That task is languishing a little.. may be worth reporting the issue from in the app as well Plutonical, if only to float it nearer the top of the list ~TheresNoTime (to explain!) 23:44, 21 November 2021 (UTC) How to create Article page for Musical Artist[edit]  Jasonseah69 (talk) 23:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69 Welcome to the Teahouse, and thank you for asking. Creating a Wikipedia article from scratch is the hardest task for anyone to achieve here - especially for a newcomer. Trying to write one about yourself is fraught with problems and issues, and will be seen as WP:PROMOTION. See our Conflict of Interest and AUTOBIOGRAPHY advice, too. But most of all, see WP:NMUSIC - this is a shortcut link to our essential Notability criteria for musicians. If you cannot find multiple, independent, in-depth sources that have written about you in detail (ignore your own PR output), and you don't meet any of the music notability criteria, then I'm afraid there's no chance. But if you feel you do meet those criteria, it's still best to leave it to someone who wants to write about you - not try to do it yourself. That person should then gain experience in editing here for some time, and then read This Guide on creating an article and submitting it for review through our Articles for Creation process, before it goes through our final 'New Page Review' process and is allowed to remain in the encyclopaedia. That's a brief outline of the process. Please do not attempt to use your Wikipedia WP:USERPAGE to write about yourself, or it will be deleted. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Good advice above. NB take "someone who wants to write about you" to mean "someone who, unprompted, wants to write about you". Not somebody asked (let alone paid) to do so. -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69: Welcome to the teahouse. You can create an article, or just submit using a draft for the Articles for Creation. However, if there aren't any sources, if may be deleted, so take your own risks for creating an article, or for less risks, create a draft. To create one, go to Wikipedia:Draft. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Severestorm28, please be aware that Jasonseah69 has only made three edits, is not autoconfirmed, and therefore cannot create an article directly. Also, their user page has been deleted as G11 - unambiguous advertising or promotion. Cullen328 (talk) 01:26, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cullen328: Next time-if someone is not autoconfirmed, and advertising, I'm giving them a warning. Thanks for the reminder. Severestorm28 (talk) 14:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) section formatting[edit] I had a draft reviewed and the reviewer suggested I use "==Section Formatting==". I cannot find any information on ==Section Formatting== on any of the help pages. Can someone send me a link which explains what ==Section Formatting== is and how to implement it? I appreciate the review and suggestions. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Looking at your draft, it's divided into headings using bold text titles, which isn't how articles are typically ordered here. If you replace the bold formatting on your section titles with two equals signs on either side, it'll create a more traditional section header for each title, which also then forces the page to create a table of contents and allows easier navigation. ??????? ? 00:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Thank You. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:47, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage COURTESY: Draft:Peebles Homestead You fixed that, but there are other problems. Several descriptive paragraphs have no references. Much of the content about his military service is general history, i.e., not about him (nor is it about the house). Hence, not relevant. David notMD (talk) 02:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) your draft has great promise. The section on the homestead today used one reference source three times, so I reformatted the citations so that the references are combined. You did a good job of finding references, can any of your sources be used for paragraphs that have no references? If not, where did you find the data about the house dimensions and construction details? If it was from a published source (such as a history book or local newspaper article) those can be used as a reference. Unfortunately, if it was from an unpublished source (such as handwritten notes found at a historical society) that would be considered original research and can't be used as a reference. You'll need to do some more work on your draft, but I'm sure it can be improved enough to be accepted. Keep up the good work. Karenthewriter (talk) 09:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Ownership gap between 1838 and 1994. David notMD (talk) 10:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) referencing content in a submitted article[edit] My recent biographical submission on Richard P. Novick was rejected because of insufficient referencing of content. Is there any way I can find out exactly which statements in the article require citations? I need a reply specific to working with the VisualEditor Spesshot (talk) 02:11, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have created versions of your proposed article at Draft:Richard Novick, User:Spesshot/sandbox and User:Spesshot/sandbox/Richard Novick. Pick one. For all, refs wrong place and wrong format. See Help:referencing for beginners. David notMD (talk) 02:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Notability[edit] I have a fringe topic I want to make an article for, but direct sources are really scarce. How can I tell if a source is a "High Quality" source in relation to Wikipedia guidelines? Baron Rea (talk) 04:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) also, can I make a page some sort of draft and have someone look over it? — Preceding unsigned comment added by Baron Rea (talk • contribs) 04:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, you can create a draft. However, before you try, here (in this thread, on this page), please specify the subject, and, if the best three sources are online, provide links to the best three. If you're not sure which are the best three, then the best five. If they're print sources, then please specify them, clearly. Then somebody here can evaluate your sources. -- Hoary (talk) 04:48, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Manga[edit] Hi, I'm new to Wikipedia. I am currently trying to figure out how to add a small detail to a page about Kennedy Space Center in Pop Culture. I'm wondering how I should cite the manga volumes of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure for the details I need. Should I use a pre-existing source on Wikipedia to the volumes that links to the publisher's website, or should i use the ISBN and author info as my citation? Cheese420 (talk) 04:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Author, book title, place, publisher, year, ISBN, and page number, Cheese420. And perhaps additional info besides, such as details of the original publication. -- Hoary (talk) 05:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cheese420 I'm going to disagree with @Hoary here. For a WP-pop cult section, you don't cite the manga, you cite a WP:RS that noticed that the manga had the KSC in it and bothered to write something about it, like at least some of the films are mentioned at [1]. Anything in that section without a decent secondary source should be removed. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) That would be better, yes. (But I'd rather got the impression that that was a lost cause.) If a secondary source comments on the pop culture item and one can cite the former, wouldn't the listing be more informative if publication details of the pop culture item itself were supplied as well? -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I will not object to adding primary source as well, but personally I wouldn't bother. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Compare, for example, Death Note at Donald Trump in popular culture. Warning, the DT article has some scary stuff. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Shocking stuff indeed, Gråbergs Gråa Sång. Not least the revelation that "Trump has an article on the online encyclopedia Wikipedia." (Well I never!) -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I may have to disagree here too, that does seem the least shocking item to me ;-) Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Problem with visual editor[edit] When I edit wikitables using Visual Editor, the tools doesn't work, I'm trying to edit a text within the table but whenever I tap the wikitable, it goes lock. Can anyone help me? Anyone? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 05:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Could you tell us which table in which article you're trying to edit? The most common cause that I can think of is that the table's cells are created with templates instead of the usual table syntax, but I have to see the table itself to know. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:46, 22 November 2021 (UTC) In filmography table. After seeing this problem, I've tried to edit in other device, but still not working. Maybe only mobile user can experience this problem. The Visual editor was okay before, it works well, but it is not working now. It's not a template, it's wikitable, could you please help me, I can't edit using visual editor—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 12:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) The question you were asked was "which table in which article"? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Blp articles, or almost all articles that has wikitable. I'm using VE until now because of referencing. But using VE to edit wikitables, doesn't work when using a mobile. The VE is working properly before—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 13:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) How can I remove a website from spam or black list?[edit] Hello I created a page in the sandbox and requested it to be reviewed. For this post, I used various sources, including a site, which I later found out it was blocked. Is it possible for me to request and remove the site from spam or blacklist? How? Also, is there a way to edit my written draft? AlexJan24 (talk) 06:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) hi AlexJan24! your draft is located at Draft:Bitumen penetration testing, feel free to input that in the search bar (including the Draft: prefix) to get to your draft. as for the blacklisted site, what source are you trying to use? theremay be a reason over at WP:RSP as to why it's blacklisted. if you want to add a whitelist for a page in there, you can hop over to MediaWiki talk:Spam-whitelist and request there to whitelist it for your article (but don't forget to read WP:Reliable sources first!). happy editing!  melecie  t - 06:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) thank you @Melecie! :) I want to use this URL: {infinitygalaxy.org/bitumen-penetration-test/} I am pretty sure that it has a good and reliable information. AlexJan24 (talk) 08:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @AlexJan24 This is a commercial website, and content like that is often placed on them to help promote their business and public perception. Can you not find something more academic and less dependent of one particular company? How about https://www.academia.edu/37842763/Penetration_Test_on_Bituminous_Materials ? Nick Moyes (talk) 10:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Nick Moyes, thank you for your suggestion! :) actually, the page you mentioned is good, but does not have the content I want. Moreover it is paid content not free. I am a petrochemical engineer. In fact, I have decided to write about such tests, which are very important and useful in the industry. As compared to other sites, I find this one to have more complete content. AlexJan24 (talk) 13:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page[edit] Hi guys I'm still feeling a bit lost. I have some factually updated text I would like to add to the BDR Thermea page. I have made my identity and intentions clear and being open, honest and upfront. There is no marketing-speak in the text. Please advise how I can place this new text. TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass: As said before, you should file an edit request on the talk page at Talk:BDR Thermea by following the instructions listed at {{Request edit}}. Even though you think the text is neutral, it may not be by Wikipedia's strict standards, so it'd still be better for more experienced editors to take a second look at it before it goes into the article. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 10:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass The best approach is to find the worst-offending sentences. For each one, create a new line and state: For [insert incorrect sentence here] please replace with ['insert better-worded sentence here] [add the url to a reliable source]. Then move on to the next issue and do the same. I fear you may have dumped a huge rewrite request on the talk page which I, for one, would not want to have to deal with. "Slowly slowly catchee monkey" as, I believe, they say. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Nick Moyes Thought I was making things easier for the editors! :) No harm intended. This is my thinking: Removed outdated text, updated facts and figures, and added a par on their new strategic focus. The company has undergone has lot of change since the original text was created. Have endeavoured to keep it short, sharp and factual and externally validated where I can. Still incorrect? I am no coder and find it really hard to navigate around Wikipedia. Sorry to be a bother but any help really appreciated.TracyMelass (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Verify my article and undelete it[edit]  Itswajidshaikh00 (talk) 11:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft_talk:Wajid_shaikh I see a draft whose text is "Hey team, i just created a page of living person autobiography with reliable sources and references citations kindly give me a hope to verifiy my new article". What I don't see is a biography of any kind. As for autobiographies, you're at the wrong website. -- Hoary (talk) 11:27, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have since been indefinitely blocked. You must succeed in appealing your block to have your account reinstated. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) FTR: Wikipedia:Sockpuppet investigations/Iwajidshaikh. --bonadea contributions talk 21:44, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Draft and article titles salted. Mjroots (talk) 11:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) "Can you plz help"[edit]  Priyanka9868 (talk) 11:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I HAVE TRIED SEVERAL TIME PUBLISHING CONTENT ON WIKIPEDIA BUT IT IS SHOWING PROMOTION CAN YOU PLZ HELP No need for capitals, Priyanka9868. Which article(s) or draft(s) are you asking about? -- Hoary (talk) 11:29, 22 November 2021 (UTC) This is the page Draft:Kapil Gupta — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868 (talk • contribs) 12:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Priyanka9868 Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about someone and their accomplishments. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about a person, showing how they meet the special Wikipedia definition of a notable person. Most of the sources in the draft seem to be interviews with the person, or simple biographical descriptions, not in depth, significant coverage of the person. Please see Your First Article. 331dot (talk) 12:14, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I quote the deleted draft: The company comes under IT Software ,Data Analytics , AI and IOT industries. At the very outset, OMLogic is not an marketing outsourcing company, but a strategic partner for your online marketing success. They offer a holistic “one-stop-shopping” solution for the internet marketing needs of clients. Within that, what does "strategic" add to "partner", what does "holistic" add to "one-stop-shopping", and why the "your" in "your online marketing success"? And Priyanka9868, you say that you have tried to publish this; but you have not. Or anyway "Priyanka9868" has not. Are you saying that you, Alex2321 and Sattu.pandey are all the same person? -- Hoary (talk) 12:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Also, are you related to Priyanka9868146? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) User:Alex2321 created the logo for CHES Special Risk that Priyanka9868146 used in Draft:CHES Special Risk. David notMD (talk) 15:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) No, we are not a same person. Actually he is one of my linkedin friend. I was not able to upload the logo of CHES Special Risk that why I have asked him to do so. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868146 (talk • contribs) 05:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Sandbox[edit] Hello is it possible to create an article if the first one you did has not yet been reviewed? how can I write on the sandbox if it only brings the draft I had done previously?Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Faith Buyaki, it is possible. Just create and use a new sandbox. You can do this by for example clicking on User:Faith Buyaki/sandbox 2 and using that. A different name is possible; just be sure that the name starts User:Faith Buyaki/. -- Hoary (talk) 13:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Biology[edit] Biologyassignments write briefly holozoic nutrition, parasitic nutrition, feeding mechanism in holozoic organisms. 105.112.176.163 (talk) 14:53, 22 November 2021 (UTC) We're not doing your coursework for you, and nor will the reference desks. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Holozoic nutrition exists as an under-referenced, Stub article. David notMD (talk) 15:40, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Help moving my draft[edit] Hi, I have created a draft, Draft:Angel Heredia, that I think is ready for review. Angel Heredia is already a Wikipedia page, so could someone with the needed rights move the draft to Draft:Angel Heredia (soccer) before I submit it for review? Thank you in advance! 73.162.91.15 (talk) 16:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you submit your draft for review and it is accepted, the reviewer will place it at the proper title. You may wish to leave a note on the draft talk page explaining the titling issue, though. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I went ahead and moved the draft (per Wikipedia:Naming conventions (sportspeople)#Association football (soccer)) to make it easier on the reviewer. DanCherek (talk) 16:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Paw partol[edit] Can someone help with gross of paw patrol the movie as acorrding to box office mojo it at $130M[1] 92.236.253.249 (talk) 17:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt11832046/  Courtesy link: PAW_Patrol:_The_Movie RudolfRed (talk) 18:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Reaching a consensus[edit] Hello, after many failures, I have explained why my edits should be accepted. Please share your opinion on these pages: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock Centrereded (talk) 17:41, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Centrereded. Your edits create the impression that your goal on Wikipedia is to make Marcelo Claure and Hans Georg Näder look bad. Cullen328 (talk) 18:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded: Reaching a consensus on an article talk page is much more difficult if the text that's proposed is long and consists of many sections. It is very unlikely that you will get a consensus in favour of what essentially amounts to "please restore all my edits", especially since the text you proposed to add is not quite neutral in tone. You received some very good advice and explanations of how the process works here; please take some time to read that and start a discussion about which specific points you think should be added to the article. Well-sourced criticism of individuals and companies can certainly be included in Wikipedia articles, but it has to be added in a neutral manner, and considering what is due weight. --bonadea contributions talk 20:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I also have no interest in the topics, but did see many comments that proposed refernces were not considered Wikipedia reliable source, and a general sense of 'piling on' rather than neutral point of view and appropriate length. You have been hammering at these articles since at least July, with for example, an attack-toned draft Draft:Hans Georg Näder. Why this deep and persistent interest in a draft and an article about German and Bolivian businessmen, respectively? David notMD (talk) 21:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 19:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @ACtiling, List of people from Merseyside? It's not locked or anything, you can edit it. Only add people that has a WP-article, preferably with a reference that supports that they belong on that page, see WP:TUTORIAL on how to add references. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:13, 22 November 2021 (UTC) WP:ADVENTURE can also be useful as an intro to Wikipedia. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You are on the verge of being blocked from making any edits to List of people from Merseyside. At the Administrators' Incidents board: "This is a newish editor, who is solely focussed on making changes to one article - List of people from Merseyside. They probably mean well. However, I have never before come across an editor who is so unable to listen to advice on basic editing skills - for example, they appear to believe that it's only possible to add a name to the list while removing one at the same time. They have been repeatedly advised, and occasionally warned, by several editors on numerous occasions, and directed to places like WP:Teahouse, but appear to be completely unable to comprehend what makes an edit allowable, and seem unwilling to learn. I would far prefer that they were not blocked but rather improve their skills - but sheer inability to achieve a modicum of competence appears to be an unresolvable problem. Any advice?" At issue, SPECIFICALLY, is that you are removing existing names for no valid reason, then inserting new names, but not consistent with the alphabetical order of the list. Stop removing names. Being a person from the past is not a valid reason to remove a name. Do not remove names. Stop removing names. REALLY. Or be blocked from ever editing this article again. David notMD (talk) 21:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Why i cant see my name on wikipedia??[edit] I have acted in a Bollywood movie as an lead actress, why i cant see myself on Wikipedia’s page 43.248.70.167 (talk) 22:07, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you meet the Wikipedia definition of a notable actress, you might merit an article, but it is strongly advised that you not attempt to write one yourself, see autobiography policy. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps[edit] Arbitrary merge to another page. Argonne was one of the only 13 founding corps of Drum Corps International in 1972. An editor (with no drum corps background) arbitrarily merged this page into a defunt D & B page. Argonne should hold it's own page because of it's historical significance. Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Argonne73. Please stop edit warring: that is regarded as disruptive, and may get you blocked. We get that you believe that there should be a separate article about Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps; but several experienced editors have disagreed with you, and nobody (including you) has argued for its retention at WP:Articles for deletion/Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps. Wikipedia works by consensus: if you think a change should be made (or not be made) it is up to you to persuade other editors according to Wikipedia's policies. A core policy is notability: it is not enough for a subject to be "of historical significance" (or popular, important, famous, influential or several other characteristics which would contribute to notability out in the world): in Wikipedia we use the word in a special sense, which mostly comes down to "are there enough reliably published sources, wholly independent of the subject, and containing significant coverage of the subject, to base an article on?" Several editors have expressed their opinion that the existing article does not establish this. If you want the article retained it is up to you to persuade other editors that there are adequate sources to establish (which means, finding such sources) that it meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. --ColinFine (talk) 22:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) pokemon showdown[edit] how do i find pokemon showdown ifo here DMPenguin (talk) 00:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) DMPenguin (talk) there is one sentence about Pokémon Showdown in the "Fan community" section of the Pokémon article. If you are able to find good published references about Pokémon Showdown you can expand the article's coverage on that topic. Karenthewriter (talk) 00:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi DMPenguin! there's also a small section on rules used by smogon, the community(?) that hosts pokémon showdown over at Pokémon_competitive_play#Smogon if you want to check that or help over there. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:56, 23 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath[edit] Hi there - can someone help me with my inline citations / footnotes? I am putting up my first wiki page submission and have feedback to improve this area - but unsure what else i need to do to meet criteria. Feedback on my new page appreciated: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath Claire Leaf (talk) 03:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Three points. First, an index number ("<ref> ... </ref>") comes immediately after a comma, period, etc; not before it. Secondly, you can (and most drafts should) reuse references: ("<ref name="XYZ">full details</ref>" for the first instance, "<ref name="XYZ" />" for each subsequent instance, where "XYZ" is something distinctive). Thirdly, for any reference, you format a link something like this Author, "[https://www.example.com/blah.blahblah/blah.html Title of the web page]", Website, date. Retrieved date. -- Hoary (talk) 03:14, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Claire Leaf. Please read Referencing for beginners. There are many techniques for creating useful references. What they all have in common is that uninformative bare URLs are not displayed, but instead text based references are displayed, which include all of the relevant bibliographic details of the reference. Things like title, author, publication or publisher, date of publication, page numbers, ISBN numbers for books, and the like. Cullen328 (talk) 03:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I fixed some of the references, but in doing so, discovered that the draft as submitted is a close paraphrasing of reference #2: https://leafie.org/seizurerescuebreath/. Reword, so that the text is in your own word rather than sentences verbatim. As for the refs I did not fix, the above link shows how to convert URLs to valid refs. There remains one other problem that may b insurmountable. Wikipedia requires that for health articles, refs meet criteria described at WP:MEDRS. The refs you have do not appear to be sufficient, i.e., not review articles of multiple clinical trials. David notMD (talk) 03:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ?[edit]  Ayaelmelegy (talk) 04:06, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Ayaelmelegy, I took a quick look at the first of these. It has 13 references, but there's no indication of which of the 13 is a reference for which part of the draft. Additionally, each of the 13 is just a "bare URL". Please see the section immediately above for how to improve the references. -- Hoary (talk) 04:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Second one, drafts also URLs. David notMD (talk) 05:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) A Request to add Template to talk page[edit] As a new Wikipedia user, I always wondered how to add Template like example NoACEMM to a User talk. Moreno Ardan1 (talk) 3:18, 23 November 2021 FYI?– Removed duplicate signature As the message on your talk page suggests, you can just add {{NoACEMM}} to your own talk page. Templates usually belong to the top of talk pages. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:25, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is Imslp a good source to back up my information?[edit] Ok so I want to edit Dolores Paterno because it says there that the original lyrics were in Spanish and translated by Levi Celerio which is not true because the original sheet music from 1880 already had Tagalog lyrics and Levi Celerio added another version of lyrics.(since the original song was published before Levi was born) I don't know other sources but the sheet music in Imslp.com that explains this. Isangtaosamundo (talk) 08:28, 23 November 2021 (UTC) In your place, I'd (i) add {{Dubious|date=November 2021}} immediately after the sentence The lyrics were translated from Spanish into Tagalog by the Filipino National Artist Levi Celerio; and (ii) raise the matter on Talk:Dolores Paterno. In the latter, give your reasons for saying that it's not true. I'm unfamiliar with imslp.com; in its current state, I have to say that it looks like mere junk. Can you perhaps retrieve an earlier, reliable version from the Wayback Machine? If so, give the title and URL of the relevant page. Feel free to cite other reliable sources (books, journals) even if they haven't been reproduced on the web and aren't downloadable. -- Hoary (talk) 10:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism[edit] Hi, I wanted to know the precise difference between blatant and subtle vandalism. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:34, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! basically subtle vandalism is vandalism where there is an attempt to make it seem real or otherwise hide it from others, for example changing a date to "21 April" which may seem real until further inspection instead of something obviously fake such as "420 January" such as the case with blatant vandalism. other such cases are, from the page linked, are adding plausible misinformation to articles (such as minor alteration of facts or additions of plausible-sounding hoaxes), hiding vandalism (such as by making two bad edits and reverting only one), simultaneously using multiple accounts or IP addresses to vandalize, abuse of maintenance and deletion templates, or reverting legitimate edits with the intent of hindering the improvement of pages. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a bunch @Melecie. But still I want some help. Can you tell me what type of vandalism the two edits are in page Warfaze, which I reverted moments back. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) it may be one of those edits that fall in between, like if you understand bengali it would probably be visible that it's an attempt at vandalism, while if you don't it could be understood as an attempt to add something constructively to a page.  melecie  t - 10:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Archives vanished[edit] I went to my own Talk to archive discussions, only to see that my previously created archives have vanished. Any idea what happened? David notMD (talk) 11:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Nevermind. Tracked it down to a self-inflicted deletion of "Talk header"" months ago. David notMD (talk) 11:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Heading correction[edit] How do i correct a spelling on the heading? i added an unwanted letter on the heading and need to remove it . How do i do it.  11:19, 23 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by ChabbieCee (talk • contribs) ChabbieCee, you edit a regular heading (such as "Heading correction" for this thread) just as you edit other text. As for the titles of articles or other pages, you need to "move" a page to its new title. So if you realize that the name you want for Ms Nerwande is Elisabeth (with an "s"), you view the page User:ChabbieCee/Elizabeth Nerwande, click on the option to move it, specify User:ChabbieCee/Elisabeth Nerwande, give your reason for the move, and say (i) yes you want to move any talk page there may be (if there's no talk page, no matter), and (ii) yes there should be a redirect from the old name to the new one. -- Hoary (talk) 11:42, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search?[edit] I created a draft about a dance collective called FlucT Draft:FlucT. When I do a search for "fluct" on Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?search=fluct&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go&ns0=1, the draft doesn't show up. This concerns me because I fear someone else may start an article on FlucT not realizing there is already a draft. Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen To search for a draft, you must put "Draft:" in front of the draft title. Keep in mind that users are not under any obligation to first search for a draft if they want to directly create an article. I have added the submission template to your draft so you can submit it. 331dot (talk) 11:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) 331dot thanks, I probably understood that. I just wonder if it's a good policy, because some editors may not know they have to put draft: in front, miss my draft, create their own draft, then there seems to be a duplication of effort that feels needless? Greg Dahlen (talk) 13:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Greg Dahlen, and welcome to the Teahouse. You can always open a discussion on this sort of issue at the Village pump. But in my view there are good reasons for the way it is. The Wikipedia that the public sees is six million encyclopaedia articles: nothing else. That's all that is indexed by external search engines, and that's all that the Wikipedia search box gives you unless you tell it otherwise. All the rest - talk pages, drafts, user pages, projects pages, policies, essays, etc, are "under the bonnet", seen only by those who choose to look inside. --ColinFine (talk) 13:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) how do i seen how many edits i have[edit] how do i see how many edits i have thanks DMPenguin (talk) 13:05, 23 November 2021 (UTC) By clicking this link. -- Hoary (talk) 13:23, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DMPenguin. Just in case you're wondering where the link that Hoary mentioned above can be found, just go to your user page in in the left-hand sidebar click on "User contributions" in the "Tools" section. Then, scroll all the way down to the very bottom of the page and click on "Edit count". That's where you'll find the aforementioned link. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:30, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I go to the little toolbar (Talk, Sandbox, Preferences, Beta, Watchlist, Contributions, Log out) that's to the left of my username, which is above any Wikipedia article I'm viewing when logged in. I click on Preferences and my number of edits is shown. That's what I see on an aging Mac laptop, when using Safari as a browser, but you may see something different on your computer. Karenthewriter (talk) 17:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) English[edit] What is a tea house? 41.114.234.36 (talk) 13:32, 23 November 2021 (UTC) On Wikipedia it is a friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia. Theroadislong (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Science[edit] How do you make a tealeaf 41.190.245.5 (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. This is intended to be a friendly place for getting help in using and editing Wikipedia: for general knowledge questions, the reference desk is a better place; or often, you can look at one of our six million articles, such as tea processing. --ColinFine (talk) 14:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Bold, Italics, or Quotes?[edit] I'm writing my first ever article from scratch, albeit I've written essays for practically empty existing articles many times before, so I know what I'm doing. One thing I'm never sure about however, is when to use bold, italics and "quotations." Although I know that "quotations" are used on songs. I'm at one of those situations now, while writing about some early appearances of a former footballer turned rapper. I'm mentioning and referencing a few of the Youtube channel's he appeared on, but as they don't have Wikipedia articles like SB.TV, Mixtape Madness, Link Up TV and GRM Daily do, I'm wondering whether I should put the channel names in bold, italics or "quotations"? Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Visual Editing[edit] Hi, can anybody out here tell me how I can visually edit a table, as in this page. I could figure out how I can add a new row below a specific row, but could not figure out how to change the sl. no of all the following rows, after adding a new row. I could now answer the edit request on that talk page, not only because I could not do it, but because the edit request had not provided relevant details. Anyway, can anyone please tell me the procedure of doing it. For example, consider the following. I want to add a new row after 7th row. And add new details. So what is the procedure, using visual editing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible It's a two step process, involving both Visual Editor and Source Editor. I have copied the source code from the article into my Sandbox as it's too risky playing around with tables directly - and especially as this is just a demo. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 (Note that my edit summary links to the source page where the authors are credited - do this even in your sandbox please, as we need to credit other people's work when we upload it, as it isn't really ours to claim as our own) You'll see I have added my very own, well-known and highly-popular YouTube Channel to a newly inserted row at position 8. You should do that bit most easily in Visual Editor by Selecting Row 7, clicking the Chevron button that appears on the far left of the table and selecting Insert below. Now type in all the information/data that you can, obviously numbering this as Row 8. Ignore the fact that text is not aligned, you'll fix that in the next step. Now save your edits (Publish Changes) then go back in, but via Edit Source so that you're editing the wikimarkup.Do not use VE. Find the row with the newly added data. (Tip: use Ctrl-F to search for my surname, so you're taken straight there.) Find the line containing the position number '8' that you added. It will look likethis: |8 Copy and paste the style command from an existing centred cell and paste it in so it looks like this: | style="text-align:center" |8 Preview it to check it's centred, and repeat elsewhere as necessary. For flags and so forth, find an exisiting row contining what you need and paste that in to the empty cell (also within Source Editor, not in VE) Finally, you will now have to manually edit every subsequent row so that the row number shifts up one to accommodate the newly-inserted row. (You cannot do this automatically as you might using Excel.) It should take you just a few minutes to fix this. I stopped at fixing this at row 20, which is why there are two rows numbered 20 in my demo. Again, don't use VE for this step. Please visit this Help page to appreciate what you can do in Visual Editor and all its limitations. You can't, for example, change colours with VE - you must use source editor. The 1st line of that section I linked to mentions a 'Phabricator' list of tasks to improve VE. Follow it to appreciate what can and can't yet be done. See https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T108245 Whilst you might be frustrated that you can't do everything in Visual Editor, just remember that this tool was devised to make basic editing simpler and more WYSIWYG for beginners. Experienced editors generally tend to avoid Visual Editor and prefer using Source Editor. You are now asking about very complex editing, where either only Source Editor or a combination of both editing tools will be necessary. I hope this all makes sense. Please ping me know when you've done with the stuff in my Sandbox, and I'll then delete the content from it. Nick Moyes (talk) 16:49, 23 November 2021 (UTC) PS: Another little tip for you: Enter as much data as you can in VE. If you can't add what you want, leave some placeholder text like aaaa bbbb ccccc etc in its place. This make it much, much easier to find the right cell to edit late in Source Editor/wikimarkup. Cheers, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:54, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Creating a page ethically[edit] Creating a page for my boss My boss is adamant that she wants a Wikipedia account (she's a prominent science communication researcher). I think she probably deserves one, but I'm also deeply aware that I'm biased as a prospective page author. Does anyone have any advice for me? I want to make my boss happy, but not by violating Wikipedia guidelines. Lorikie (talk) 14:26, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: You'll need to read and abide by Wikipedia:Conflict of interest. DuncanHill (talk) 14:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lorikie, and welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for being up-front about your situation. Unfortunately, there are some formidable obstacles in the way of you being able to satisfy your boss. As Duncan says, you need to read up about conflict of interest, and further, you need to make the formal declarations that you are a paid editor (it doesn't matter if you are specifically paid to do this, from what you say it is part of your job). Next, you need to drop the idea of "deserving a page", because that assumes that a Wikipedia article is in any way for the benefit of its subject. Of course many people (and other entities) do get some benefit frrom there being a Wikipedia article about them, but that is incidental: Wikipedia has no such purpose, and indeed is indifferent as to whether the subject wants an article about them or does not want an article about them. An article about your boss will not belong to her, will not be under her control, will not necessarily say what she wants it to say, and should be based almost entirely on what people wholly unconnected with her have chosen to publish about her (good or bad!) and not on what she or her associates say or want to say. You might like to show her an article about yourself isn't necessarily a good thing. The counterpart of "deserve" that Wikipedia actually uses is, "does the subject meet Wikipedia's criteria for notability? This is not directly related to prominence, importance, influence, popularity, or any of the other things that you might normally connect with "notability": in essence it is a question of whether there are enough reliably published sources, wholly unconnected with the subject to base an article on. If you and she decide that you still want there to be an article, there are more hurdles. Creating a new article is much more difficult than it looks - I liken it to building a house as your first building project, or playing a public recital after your first violin lesson, and always advise new editors to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" and how Wikipedia works. Editors who do not heed this advice often have a frustrating time as they put in a lot of work and don't understand why their house keeps falling down. Having a conflict of interest you will likely find it even harder, as you will need to basically forget everything you know about your boss, and summarise only what those independent commentators have published. If you decide to go ahead, you need to read your first article, and then use the articles for creation process to create a draft. --ColinFine (talk) 14:57, 23 November 2021 (UTC) If pressed to proceed by your boss, see if there are three or more published articles about her - content at length, not just a name-mention - and then use guidance at Help:Referencing for beginners to create references in proper ref format in your Sandbox. If you cannot find publications about her, then the effort is futile. David notMD (talk) 15:52, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Text Allignment[edit] Any idea on text alignment in table. I want to center align some text in tables, using visual editor. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:44, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible I think you'd probably need to use wikisource code for that, using the "text-align:center; parameter. PS: I've tweaked the demo warning you placed on your sandbox page as you'd left the nowiki commands in which stop it from working. So the warning now looks like it's come from me, but obviously isn't a real vandalism warning. The best way to leave warnings is to enable WP:TWINKLE in your Preferences. Then it does it automatically for you via menu options, plus a whole lot more. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Tables[edit] Today I was editing random articles, when I came across Nach Baliye. I was reading the article, trying to find for any errors, when I came across this table [2]. I just sort of went mad seeing this table. Just a well formatted and advanced table, with all the color schemes, and just nice cell merging. Can anyone, for heaven's sake tell me how that table was created with all those attractive features. I don't really think that the Wiki markup was typed out. There must be some modern graphical interface, for doing such a tedious thing. I want to know how that table was created. I would really be glad, if I get the answer from someone who is an expert in this matter, and has been editing Wikipedia for a couple of years, because, I want the exact and precise method of creating such a table. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:58, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I've been editing for over 10 years and wouldn't dare to create such a thing. I have, however, created very long data tables by starting in Excel, getting all the sorting, the text and the wikilinks and in the right places before exporting it with a tool to Wikimarkup. But I'm not aware of a tool to make tables look pretty like that - so I shall await for answers from other users more experienced in such things, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: It takes work, often over time with improvements by different editors, often starting with copying the format from another page. The first similar table in the article was added by an IP here with edit summary "added table like other shows Jhalak". That may refer to Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart or an earlier season. It could maybe be tracked further back but I haven't tried. Help:Table has general help but it's complicated. Much of it is the same or similar as HTML tables which some editors already know. PrimeHunter (talk) 16:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Prime Healthcare[edit] My interest in CAlifornia health systems drew me to Prime Healthcare, where I was struck by the difference in how Wiki editors handle the material. Whereas large systems such as Sutter and Kaiser are given the opportunity to list history, background, hospital names, etc, Prime's editing history is aggressive and heavy handed. The result is a page listing controversy and nothing else. Prime owns 45 hospitals nationwide, employs 50000 people, but you wouldn't know it by Wiki. BTW I am in no way affiliated or compensated by Prime; my research is for a graduate program. I'm just amazed at the discrepancy and poor treatment. I haven't researched it enough to determine whether sources should be improved on deleted materials, but that is different than what edit history shows. Any attempts to improve the page are immediately deleted wholesale, in apparent violation of Wiki editing rules. (I attempted to undo some edits myself) Can anyone explain this? Prime owner Prem Reddy has made a number of enemies with his handling of labor, etc. Is that at play here? Archie515 (talk) 16:46, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Prime Healthcare Services Karenthewriter (talk) 17:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Archie515. Welcome to the Teahouse! You can discuss the issue about the content of the article on the article's talk page. The concerned editors might engage in the conversation and help you in finding a possible solution. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 17:24, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Disambiguation-links tag on redirects[edit] In this edit I intentionally changed a redirect from targeting an article to targeting a disambiguation page. To my surprise, the "adding disambiguation links" tag was added. In a way, it makes sense (I added a link to a disambiguation page), but on the other hand, the tag is probably meant for when someone adds a link in an article without knowing it's a disambiguation page, like if I added a link to Georgia or Mercury in an article. Can something be changed so that this tagging isn't activated when the end result of the edit is a redirect? I reported this at WP:EF/FP but was sent here for a reason I don't understand: the responding editor said both that the tag isn't activated and that it's working properly. 72.77.45.188 (talk) 17:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The edit filter (which interdicts edits) is separate from the tagging system (which describes what an edit is). —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 17:38, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Do anyone think like that?[edit] Are there people actually thinking that this page represents a universal and unbiased point of view? Owerthise (talk) 18:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I think like that. It doesn't seem biased to me. What direction do you think it's biased in? Maproom (talk) 18:43, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think there is such a thing as an universal point of view, certainly not about a topic connected to religion. It looks neutral to me; it may not be perfect (no article is) but there are no obvious problems. --bonadea contributions talk 19:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Help with revision[edit] Hello! I'm trying to revise the first two paragraphs of the Cultural context section of Cueva de las Manos and I need help with it. I've already put in a copy edit request for the whole page with the Guild of Copyeditors, but I was wondering if there was a group/person willing to help with this particular section in the meantime. I'm trying to revise the section in accordance with the following advice of FunkMonk in the talk page: There is some repetition in how you describe the paintings were returned to and were influential for the people throughout many thousands of years, perhaps check if someone of it can be consolidated or made less similar. If anyone would be willing to lend a hand in this respect it would be much appreciated. If there is a better place to ask for such help, I would be grateful if someone could point me there. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Best, Tyrone Madera (talk) 18:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) This might be better for the Talk Page, but one possible way to consolidate this might be to write this instead, which combines two separate statements: However, that so many people contributed to the artwork for thousands of years suggests the cave held great significance for the artists, with earlier groups influencing later ones through a continuous narrative, playing out over millennia. But that's just one possibility. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 18:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1056819105" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived CS1 errors: empty citation Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 23 November 2021, at 19:02 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH RudolfRed, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 Autoconfirmed user 2 Template:Uw-create-kept 3 Audio sample 4 How to create Article page for Musical Artist 5 section formatting 6 Citing Manga 7 Problem with visual editor 8 How can I remove a website from spam or black list? 9 Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page 10 Verify my article and undelete it 11 "Can you plz help" 12 Sandbox 13 Biology 14 Help moving my draft 15 Paw partol 16 Reaching a consensus 17 I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page 18 Why i cant see my name on wikipedia?? 19 Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps 20 pokemon showdown 21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath 22 I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ? 23 A Request to add Template to talk page 24 Is Imslp a good source to back up my information? 25 Vandalism 26 My Talk Archives vanished 27 Heading correction 28 Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search? 29 how do i seen how many edits i have 30 English 31 Science 32 Bold, Italics, or Quotes? 33 Visual Editing 34 Creating a page ethically 35 Text Allignment 36 Wiki Tables 37 Prime Healthcare 38 Disambiguation-links tag on redirects 39 Do anyone think like that? 40 Help with revision 41 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 42 new wikipedia page 43 What do you do on this page 44 Help writing a page 45 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 46 Ongoing Events Section 47 Rv tags 48 Reftoolbar 49 User level 50 Dead Links 51 Add (journalist) to title 52 Distracting AFC submission templates 53 Wikipedia:Tendentious editing 54 Wikipedia Markup 55 My Talk Page 56 Newcomers 57 IP blocking for 31 hours 58 Amkgp is Sock editing 59 Article Not Published - not adequate sources 60 Final Publish 61 How do I contribute images? 62 Creating Book Pages 63 ASIAN MONTH Most recent archives 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131, 1132 Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yep, @Patrick Vedel you should just close that and/or any other notes you might have and proceed to edit said article. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The sentences 2 - 5 are there in case they don't know about them. Faster than Thunder (talk) 06:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: & @Nick Moyes: thank you for guidance. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 07:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) How to create Article page for Musical Artist[edit]  Jasonseah69 (talk) 23:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69 Welcome to the Teahouse, and thank you for asking. Creating a Wikipedia article from scratch is the hardest task for anyone to achieve here - especially for a newcomer. Trying to write one about yourself is fraught with problems and issues, and will be seen as WP:PROMOTION. See our Conflict of Interest and AUTOBIOGRAPHY advice, too. But most of all, see WP:NMUSIC - this is a shortcut link to our essential Notability criteria for musicians. If you cannot find multiple, independent, in-depth sources that have written about you in detail (ignore your own PR output), and you don't meet any of the music notability criteria, then I'm afraid there's no chance. But if you feel you do meet those criteria, it's still best to leave it to someone who wants to write about you - not try to do it yourself. That person should then gain experience in editing here for some time, and then read This Guide on creating an article and submitting it for review through our Articles for Creation process, before it goes through our final 'New Page Review' process and is allowed to remain in the encyclopaedia. That's a brief outline of the process. Please do not attempt to use your Wikipedia WP:USERPAGE to write about yourself, or it will be deleted. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Good advice above. NB take "someone who wants to write about you" to mean "someone who, unprompted, wants to write about you". Not somebody asked (let alone paid) to do so. -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69: Welcome to the teahouse. You can create an article, or just submit using a draft for the Articles for Creation. However, if there aren't any sources, if may be deleted, so take your own risks for creating an article, or for less risks, create a draft. To create one, go to Wikipedia:Draft. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Severestorm28, please be aware that Jasonseah69 has only made three edits, is not autoconfirmed, and therefore cannot create an article directly. Also, their user page has been deleted as G11 - unambiguous advertising or promotion. Cullen328 (talk) 01:26, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cullen328: Next time-if someone is not autoconfirmed, and advertising, I'm giving them a warning. Thanks for the reminder. Severestorm28 (talk) 14:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) section formatting[edit] I had a draft reviewed and the reviewer suggested I use "==Section Formatting==". I cannot find any information on ==Section Formatting== on any of the help pages. Can someone send me a link which explains what ==Section Formatting== is and how to implement it? I appreciate the review and suggestions. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Looking at your draft, it's divided into headings using bold text titles, which isn't how articles are typically ordered here. If you replace the bold formatting on your section titles with two equals signs on either side, it'll create a more traditional section header for each title, which also then forces the page to create a table of contents and allows easier navigation. ??????? ? 00:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Thank You. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:47, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage COURTESY: Draft:Peebles Homestead You fixed that, but there are other problems. Several descriptive paragraphs have no references. Much of the content about his military service is general history, i.e., not about him (nor is it about the house). Hence, not relevant. David notMD (talk) 02:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) your draft has great promise. The section on the homestead today used one reference source three times, so I reformatted the citations so that the references are combined. You did a good job of finding references, can any of your sources be used for paragraphs that have no references? If not, where did you find the data about the house dimensions and construction details? If it was from a published source (such as a history book or local newspaper article) those can be used as a reference. Unfortunately, if it was from an unpublished source (such as handwritten notes found at a historical society) that would be considered original research and can't be used as a reference. You'll need to do some more work on your draft, but I'm sure it can be improved enough to be accepted. Keep up the good work. Karenthewriter (talk) 09:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Ownership gap between 1838 and 1994. David notMD (talk) 10:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Karenthewriter, Thanks for combining my multiple citations; I couldn't figure that out! The dimensions for the house (and other observations) came from me. I measured the house to see if the dimensions matched the 1798 Tax records, but I'm sure I can find them in other sources, especially the State Museum Survey. Also, I think the few sentences about Peebles' military record are relevant, because his military service adds credibility to the comment that the property could be eligible for the National Register. Without a notable person, places like Monticello and Montpelier would just be old brick houses. I could insert his military service elsewhere. Thoughts? Granted, Peebles service and the Cumberland County Militia could be separate articles which I can't do right now. I will clean up my citations. SharedHeritage (talk) 01:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @SharedHeritage: To answer your original question, see MOS:SECTIONS. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 05:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) I'm glad I could help with your multiple citations. I've been an editor since 2007 and I just recently mastered that skill. There's a lot to learn. As David notMD stated the information about Peebles military service isn't about the homestead you're writing about, so a reviewer might feel its unnecessary. (I'm not a reviewer, so I am no expert on that subject.) You mention Peebles received two different land grants. Did he receive any of his land due to his military service? If so you could state that, which would tie in the homestead with him being in the military. I live in northwest Pennsylvania, and some of the area's earliest settlers apparently received land because of their Revolutionary War service, so that's why I asked about the land grants. One thing you need to be aware of is that Wikipedia does not want any original research, or writers speculating on what happened. (To quote Sergeant Friday from the old TV show Dragnet – "Just the facts, ma'am.") So I'm a bit concerned about such phrases as "it is reasonable to believe that the windows are original..." and "The two front doors were likely replaced at this time," for that reads as though you are guessing or giving an opinion. You can quote someone and say that researcher Joe Smart-Guy believes the windows are original, and give a reference citation, but don't make it sound as though it's your conclusion. Remember that you're writing an encyclopedia article for the general reading public, and not trying to convince a historical commission to add the house to the National Register. I hope I'm not overwhelming your with details, but I'm aware that writing for Wikipedia means following Wikipedia rules. Best wishes on your research and writing project. Karenthewriter (talk) 05:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Manga[edit] Hi, I'm new to Wikipedia. I am currently trying to figure out how to add a small detail to a page about Kennedy Space Center in Pop Culture. I'm wondering how I should cite the manga volumes of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure for the details I need. Should I use a pre-existing source on Wikipedia to the volumes that links to the publisher's website, or should i use the ISBN and author info as my citation? Cheese420 (talk) 04:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Author, book title, place, publisher, year, ISBN, and page number, Cheese420. And perhaps additional info besides, such as details of the original publication. -- Hoary (talk) 05:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cheese420 I'm going to disagree with @Hoary here. For a WP-pop cult section, you don't cite the manga, you cite a WP:RS that noticed that the manga had the KSC in it and bothered to write something about it, like at least some of the films are mentioned at [1]. Anything in that section without a decent secondary source should be removed. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) That would be better, yes. (But I'd rather got the impression that that was a lost cause.) If a secondary source comments on the pop culture item and one can cite the former, wouldn't the listing be more informative if publication details of the pop culture item itself were supplied as well? -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I will not object to adding primary source as well, but personally I wouldn't bother. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Compare, for example, Death Note at Donald Trump in popular culture. Warning, the DT article has some scary stuff. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Shocking stuff indeed, Gråbergs Gråa Sång. Not least the revelation that "Trump has an article on the online encyclopedia Wikipedia." (Well I never!) -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I may have to disagree here too, that does seem the least shocking item to me ;-) Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Problem with visual editor[edit] When I edit wikitables using Visual Editor, the tools doesn't work, I'm trying to edit a text within the table but whenever I tap the wikitable, it goes lock. Can anyone help me? Anyone? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 05:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Could you tell us which table in which article you're trying to edit? The most common cause that I can think of is that the table's cells are created with templates instead of the usual table syntax, but I have to see the table itself to know. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:46, 22 November 2021 (UTC) In filmography table. After seeing this problem, I've tried to edit in other device, but still not working. Maybe only mobile user can experience this problem. The Visual editor was okay before, it works well, but it is not working now. It's not a template, it's wikitable, could you please help me, I can't edit using visual editor—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 12:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) The question you were asked was "which table in which article"? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Blp articles, or almost all articles that has wikitable. I'm using VE until now because of referencing. But using VE to edit wikitables, doesn't work when using a mobile. The VE is working properly before—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 13:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Please provide the specific name of one article where you are having this issue. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 05:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty: Try to look my sandbox, there is a draft article with a table there. I can't link specific article, because I'm having this problem in all articles that has a table, my example is my sandbox—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: I had no problem editing the wikitable on user:Ctrlwiki/sandbox with VisualEditor with my Windows 10 PC and Google Chrome. What hardware/software are you using? Are you using the Wikipedia app? Or are you using browser on your phone (in mobile view or desktop view)? What do you mean "it goes lock"? Could you please provide a screenshot of that situation? GoingBatty (talk) 15:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How can I remove a website from spam or black list?[edit] Hello I created a page in the sandbox and requested it to be reviewed. For this post, I used various sources, including a site, which I later found out it was blocked. Is it possible for me to request and remove the site from spam or blacklist? How? Also, is there a way to edit my written draft? AlexJan24 (talk) 06:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) hi AlexJan24! your draft is located at Draft:Bitumen penetration testing, feel free to input that in the search bar (including the Draft: prefix) to get to your draft. as for the blacklisted site, what source are you trying to use? theremay be a reason over at WP:RSP as to why it's blacklisted. if you want to add a whitelist for a page in there, you can hop over to MediaWiki talk:Spam-whitelist and request there to whitelist it for your article (but don't forget to read WP:Reliable sources first!). happy editing!  melecie  t - 06:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) thank you @Melecie! :) I want to use this URL: {infinitygalaxy.org/bitumen-penetration-test/} I am pretty sure that it has a good and reliable information. AlexJan24 (talk) 08:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @AlexJan24 This is a commercial website, and content like that is often placed on them to help promote their business and public perception. Can you not find something more academic and less dependent of one particular company? How about https://www.academia.edu/37842763/Penetration_Test_on_Bituminous_Materials ? Nick Moyes (talk) 10:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Nick Moyes, thank you for your suggestion! :) actually, the page you mentioned is good, but does not have the content I want. Moreover it is paid content not free. I am a petrochemical engineer. In fact, I have decided to write about such tests, which are very important and useful in the industry. As compared to other sites, I find this one to have more complete content. AlexJan24 (talk) 13:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page[edit] Hi guys I'm still feeling a bit lost. I have some factually updated text I would like to add to the BDR Thermea page. I have made my identity and intentions clear and being open, honest and upfront. There is no marketing-speak in the text. Please advise how I can place this new text. TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass: As said before, you should file an edit request on the talk page at Talk:BDR Thermea by following the instructions listed at {{Request edit}}. Even though you think the text is neutral, it may not be by Wikipedia's strict standards, so it'd still be better for more experienced editors to take a second look at it before it goes into the article. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 10:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass The best approach is to find the worst-offending sentences. For each one, create a new line and state: For [insert incorrect sentence here] please replace with ['insert better-worded sentence here] [add the url to a reliable source]. Then move on to the next issue and do the same. I fear you may have dumped a huge rewrite request on the talk page which I, for one, would not want to have to deal with. "Slowly slowly catchee monkey" as, I believe, they say. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Nick Moyes Thought I was making things easier for the editors! :) No harm intended. This is my thinking: Removed outdated text, updated facts and figures, and added a par on their new strategic focus. The company has undergone has lot of change since the original text was created. Have endeavoured to keep it short, sharp and factual and externally validated where I can. Still incorrect? I am no coder and find it really hard to navigate around Wikipedia. Sorry to be a bother but any help really appreciated.TracyMelass (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Verify my article and undelete it[edit]  Itswajidshaikh00 (talk) 11:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft_talk:Wajid_shaikh I see a draft whose text is "Hey team, i just created a page of living person autobiography with reliable sources and references citations kindly give me a hope to verifiy my new article". What I don't see is a biography of any kind. As for autobiographies, you're at the wrong website. -- Hoary (talk) 11:27, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have since been indefinitely blocked. You must succeed in appealing your block to have your account reinstated. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) FTR: Wikipedia:Sockpuppet investigations/Iwajidshaikh. --bonadea contributions talk 21:44, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Draft and article titles salted. Mjroots (talk) 11:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) "Can you plz help"[edit]  Priyanka9868 (talk) 11:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I HAVE TRIED SEVERAL TIME PUBLISHING CONTENT ON WIKIPEDIA BUT IT IS SHOWING PROMOTION CAN YOU PLZ HELP No need for capitals, Priyanka9868. Which article(s) or draft(s) are you asking about? -- Hoary (talk) 11:29, 22 November 2021 (UTC) This is the page Draft:Kapil Gupta — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868 (talk • contribs) 12:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Priyanka9868 Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about someone and their accomplishments. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about a person, showing how they meet the special Wikipedia definition of a notable person. Most of the sources in the draft seem to be interviews with the person, or simple biographical descriptions, not in depth, significant coverage of the person. Please see Your First Article. 331dot (talk) 12:14, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I quote the deleted draft: The company comes under IT Software ,Data Analytics , AI and IOT industries. At the very outset, OMLogic is not an marketing outsourcing company, but a strategic partner for your online marketing success. They offer a holistic “one-stop-shopping” solution for the internet marketing needs of clients. Within that, what does "strategic" add to "partner", what does "holistic" add to "one-stop-shopping", and why the "your" in "your online marketing success"? And Priyanka9868, you say that you have tried to publish this; but you have not. Or anyway "Priyanka9868" has not. Are you saying that you, Alex2321 and Sattu.pandey are all the same person? -- Hoary (talk) 12:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Also, are you related to Priyanka9868146? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) User:Alex2321 created the logo for CHES Special Risk that Priyanka9868146 used in Draft:CHES Special Risk. David notMD (talk) 15:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) No, we are not a same person. Actually he is one of my linkedin friend. I was not able to upload the logo of CHES Special Risk that why I have asked him to do so. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868146 (talk • contribs) 05:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Sandbox[edit] Hello is it possible to create an article if the first one you did has not yet been reviewed? how can I write on the sandbox if it only brings the draft I had done previously?Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Faith Buyaki, it is possible. Just create and use a new sandbox. You can do this by for example clicking on User:Faith Buyaki/sandbox 2 and using that. A different name is possible; just be sure that the name starts User:Faith Buyaki/. -- Hoary (talk) 13:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Biology[edit] Biologyassignments write briefly holozoic nutrition, parasitic nutrition, feeding mechanism in holozoic organisms. 105.112.176.163 (talk) 14:53, 22 November 2021 (UTC) We're not doing your coursework for you, and nor will the reference desks. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Holozoic nutrition exists as an under-referenced, Stub article. David notMD (talk) 15:40, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Help moving my draft[edit] Hi, I have created a draft, Draft:Angel Heredia, that I think is ready for review. Angel Heredia is already a Wikipedia page, so could someone with the needed rights move the draft to Draft:Angel Heredia (soccer) before I submit it for review? Thank you in advance! 73.162.91.15 (talk) 16:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you submit your draft for review and it is accepted, the reviewer will place it at the proper title. You may wish to leave a note on the draft talk page explaining the titling issue, though. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I went ahead and moved the draft (per Wikipedia:Naming conventions (sportspeople)#Association football (soccer)) to make it easier on the reviewer. DanCherek (talk) 16:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Paw partol[edit] Can someone help with gross of paw patrol the movie as acorrding to box office mojo it at $130M[1] 92.236.253.249 (talk) 17:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt11832046/  Courtesy link: PAW_Patrol:_The_Movie RudolfRed (talk) 18:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC)  Done by Clpo13. GoingBatty (talk) 05:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reaching a consensus[edit] Hello, after many failures, I have explained why my edits should be accepted. Please share your opinion on these pages: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock Centrereded (talk) 17:41, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Centrereded. Your edits create the impression that your goal on Wikipedia is to make Marcelo Claure and Hans Georg Näder look bad. Cullen328 (talk) 18:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded: Reaching a consensus on an article talk page is much more difficult if the text that's proposed is long and consists of many sections. It is very unlikely that you will get a consensus in favour of what essentially amounts to "please restore all my edits", especially since the text you proposed to add is not quite neutral in tone. You received some very good advice and explanations of how the process works here; please take some time to read that and start a discussion about which specific points you think should be added to the article. Well-sourced criticism of individuals and companies can certainly be included in Wikipedia articles, but it has to be added in a neutral manner, and considering what is due weight. --bonadea contributions talk 20:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I also have no interest in the topics, but did see many comments that proposed refernces were not considered Wikipedia reliable source, and a general sense of 'piling on' rather than neutral point of view and appropriate length. You have been hammering at these articles since at least July, with for example, an attack-toned draft Draft:Hans Georg Näder. Why this deep and persistent interest in a draft and an article about German and Bolivian businessmen, respectively? David notMD (talk) 21:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 19:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @ACtiling, List of people from Merseyside? It's not locked or anything, you can edit it. Only add people that has a WP-article, preferably with a reference that supports that they belong on that page, see WP:TUTORIAL on how to add references. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:13, 22 November 2021 (UTC) WP:ADVENTURE can also be useful as an intro to Wikipedia. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You are on the verge of being blocked from making any edits to List of people from Merseyside. At the Administrators' Incidents board: "This is a newish editor, who is solely focussed on making changes to one article - List of people from Merseyside. They probably mean well. However, I have never before come across an editor who is so unable to listen to advice on basic editing skills - for example, they appear to believe that it's only possible to add a name to the list while removing one at the same time. They have been repeatedly advised, and occasionally warned, by several editors on numerous occasions, and directed to places like WP:Teahouse, but appear to be completely unable to comprehend what makes an edit allowable, and seem unwilling to learn. I would far prefer that they were not blocked but rather improve their skills - but sheer inability to achieve a modicum of competence appears to be an unresolvable problem. Any advice?" At issue, SPECIFICALLY, is that you are removing existing names for no valid reason, then inserting new names, but not consistent with the alphabetical order of the list. Stop removing names. Being a person from the past is not a valid reason to remove a name. Do not remove names. Stop removing names. REALLY. Or be blocked from ever editing this article again. David notMD (talk) 21:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Why i cant see my name on wikipedia??[edit] I have acted in a Bollywood movie as an lead actress, why i cant see myself on Wikipedia’s page 43.248.70.167 (talk) 22:07, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you meet the Wikipedia definition of a notable actress, you might merit an article, but it is strongly advised that you not attempt to write one yourself, see autobiography policy. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps[edit] Arbitrary merge to another page. Argonne was one of the only 13 founding corps of Drum Corps International in 1972. An editor (with no drum corps background) arbitrarily merged this page into a defunt D & B page. Argonne should hold it's own page because of it's historical significance. Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Argonne73. Please stop edit warring: that is regarded as disruptive, and may get you blocked. We get that you believe that there should be a separate article about Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps; but several experienced editors have disagreed with you, and nobody (including you) has argued for its retention at WP:Articles for deletion/Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps. Wikipedia works by consensus: if you think a change should be made (or not be made) it is up to you to persuade other editors according to Wikipedia's policies. A core policy is notability: it is not enough for a subject to be "of historical significance" (or popular, important, famous, influential or several other characteristics which would contribute to notability out in the world): in Wikipedia we use the word in a special sense, which mostly comes down to "are there enough reliably published sources, wholly independent of the subject, and containing significant coverage of the subject, to base an article on?" Several editors have expressed their opinion that the existing article does not establish this. If you want the article retained it is up to you to persuade other editors that there are adequate sources to establish (which means, finding such sources) that it meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. --ColinFine (talk) 22:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) pokemon showdown[edit] how do i find pokemon showdown ifo here DMPenguin (talk) 00:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) DMPenguin (talk) there is one sentence about Pokémon Showdown in the "Fan community" section of the Pokémon article. If you are able to find good published references about Pokémon Showdown you can expand the article's coverage on that topic. Karenthewriter (talk) 00:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi DMPenguin! there's also a small section on rules used by smogon, the community(?) that hosts pokémon showdown over at Pokémon_competitive_play#Smogon if you want to check that or help over there. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:56, 23 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath[edit] Hi there - can someone help me with my inline citations / footnotes? I am putting up my first wiki page submission and have feedback to improve this area - but unsure what else i need to do to meet criteria. Feedback on my new page appreciated: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath Claire Leaf (talk) 03:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Three points. First, an index number ("<ref> ... </ref>") comes immediately after a comma, period, etc; not before it. Secondly, you can (and most drafts should) reuse references: ("<ref name="XYZ">full details</ref>" for the first instance, "<ref name="XYZ" />" for each subsequent instance, where "XYZ" is something distinctive). Thirdly, for any reference, you format a link something like this Author, "[https://www.example.com/blah.blahblah/blah.html Title of the web page]", Website, date. Retrieved date. -- Hoary (talk) 03:14, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Claire Leaf. Please read Referencing for beginners. There are many techniques for creating useful references. What they all have in common is that uninformative bare URLs are not displayed, but instead text based references are displayed, which include all of the relevant bibliographic details of the reference. Things like title, author, publication or publisher, date of publication, page numbers, ISBN numbers for books, and the like. Cullen328 (talk) 03:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I fixed some of the references, but in doing so, discovered that the draft as submitted is a close paraphrasing of reference #2: https://leafie.org/seizurerescuebreath/. Reword, so that the text is in your own word rather than sentences verbatim. As for the refs I did not fix, the above link shows how to convert URLs to valid refs. There remains one other problem that may b insurmountable. Wikipedia requires that for health articles, refs meet criteria described at WP:MEDRS. The refs you have do not appear to be sufficient, i.e., not review articles of multiple clinical trials. David notMD (talk) 03:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ?[edit]  Ayaelmelegy (talk) 04:06, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Ayaelmelegy, I took a quick look at the first of these. It has 13 references, but there's no indication of which of the 13 is a reference for which part of the draft. Additionally, each of the 13 is just a "bare URL". Please see the section immediately above for how to improve the references. -- Hoary (talk) 04:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Second one, drafts also URLs. David notMD (talk) 05:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) A Request to add Template to talk page[edit] As a new Wikipedia user, I always wondered how to add Template like example NoACEMM to a User talk. Moreno Ardan1 (talk) 3:18, 23 November 2021 FYI?– Removed duplicate signature As the message on your talk page suggests, you can just add {{NoACEMM}} to your own talk page. Templates usually belong to the top of talk pages. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:25, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is Imslp a good source to back up my information?[edit] Ok so I want to edit Dolores Paterno because it says there that the original lyrics were in Spanish and translated by Levi Celerio which is not true because the original sheet music from 1880 already had Tagalog lyrics and Levi Celerio added another version of lyrics.(since the original song was published before Levi was born) I don't know other sources but the sheet music in Imslp.com that explains this. Isangtaosamundo (talk) 08:28, 23 November 2021 (UTC) In your place, I'd (i) add {{Dubious|date=November 2021}} immediately after the sentence The lyrics were translated from Spanish into Tagalog by the Filipino National Artist Levi Celerio; and (ii) raise the matter on Talk:Dolores Paterno. In the latter, give your reasons for saying that it's not true. I'm unfamiliar with imslp.com; in its current state, I have to say that it looks like mere junk. Can you perhaps retrieve an earlier, reliable version from the Wayback Machine? If so, give the title and URL of the relevant page. Feel free to cite other reliable sources (books, journals) even if they haven't been reproduced on the web and aren't downloadable. -- Hoary (talk) 10:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism[edit] Hi, I wanted to know the precise difference between blatant and subtle vandalism. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:34, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! basically subtle vandalism is vandalism where there is an attempt to make it seem real or otherwise hide it from others, for example changing a date to "21 April" which may seem real until further inspection instead of something obviously fake such as "420 January" such as the case with blatant vandalism. other such cases are, from the page linked, are adding plausible misinformation to articles (such as minor alteration of facts or additions of plausible-sounding hoaxes), hiding vandalism (such as by making two bad edits and reverting only one), simultaneously using multiple accounts or IP addresses to vandalize, abuse of maintenance and deletion templates, or reverting legitimate edits with the intent of hindering the improvement of pages. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a bunch @Melecie. But still I want some help. Can you tell me what type of vandalism the two edits are in page Warfaze, which I reverted moments back. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) it may be one of those edits that fall in between, like if you understand bengali it would probably be visible that it's an attempt at vandalism, while if you don't it could be understood as an attempt to add something constructively to a page.  melecie  t - 10:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Yeah so the language matters. Any way that you @Melecie. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Archives vanished[edit] I went to my own Talk to archive discussions, only to see that my previously created archives have vanished. Any idea what happened? David notMD (talk) 11:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Nevermind. Tracked it down to a self-inflicted deletion of "Talk header"" months ago. David notMD (talk) 11:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Heading correction[edit] How do i correct a spelling on the heading? i added an unwanted letter on the heading and need to remove it . How do i do it.  11:19, 23 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by ChabbieCee (talk • contribs) ChabbieCee, you edit a regular heading (such as "Heading correction" for this thread) just as you edit other text. As for the titles of articles or other pages, you need to "move" a page to its new title. So if you realize that the name you want for Ms Nerwande is Elisabeth (with an "s"), you view the page User:ChabbieCee/Elizabeth Nerwande, click on the option to move it, specify User:ChabbieCee/Elisabeth Nerwande, give your reason for the move, and say (i) yes you want to move any talk page there may be (if there's no talk page, no matter), and (ii) yes there should be a redirect from the old name to the new one. -- Hoary (talk) 11:42, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search?[edit] I created a draft about a dance collective called FlucT Draft:FlucT. When I do a search for "fluct" on Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?search=fluct&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go&ns0=1, the draft doesn't show up. This concerns me because I fear someone else may start an article on FlucT not realizing there is already a draft. Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen To search for a draft, you must put "Draft:" in front of the draft title. Keep in mind that users are not under any obligation to first search for a draft if they want to directly create an article. I have added the submission template to your draft so you can submit it. 331dot (talk) 11:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) 331dot thanks, I probably understood that. I just wonder if it's a good policy, because some editors may not know they have to put draft: in front, miss my draft, create their own draft, then there seems to be a duplication of effort that feels needless? Greg Dahlen (talk) 13:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Greg Dahlen, and welcome to the Teahouse. You can always open a discussion on this sort of issue at the Village pump. But in my view there are good reasons for the way it is. The Wikipedia that the public sees is six million encyclopaedia articles: nothing else. That's all that is indexed by external search engines, and that's all that the Wikipedia search box gives you unless you tell it otherwise. All the rest - talk pages, drafts, user pages, projects pages, policies, essays, etc, are "under the bonnet", seen only by those who choose to look inside. --ColinFine (talk) 13:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Greg Dahlen: There is actually a clever feature which makes it unlikely anyone would accidentally start a second draft with exactly the same name as one that already exists. If you go through all the steps to begin a new article called "FlucT" by typing that in the search box, choosing the option to "Search for pages containing FlucT" and then clicking on the red link in the search output page where it says "You may create the page "FlucT", but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered." you'll find that the newly created page will have a big banner at the top saying "There is a draft for this article at Draft:FlucT." You can confirm this by clicking on the redlink I placed in this answer, which cuts out all the searching and will now go straight into draft creation mode when clicked. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:18, 24 November 2021 (UTC) how do i seen how many edits i have[edit] how do i see how many edits i have thanks DMPenguin (talk) 13:05, 23 November 2021 (UTC) By clicking this link. -- Hoary (talk) 13:23, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DMPenguin. Just in case you're wondering where the link that Hoary mentioned above can be found, just go to your user page in in the left-hand sidebar click on "User contributions" in the "Tools" section. Then, scroll all the way down to the very bottom of the page and click on "Edit count". That's where you'll find the aforementioned link. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:30, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I go to the little toolbar (Talk, Sandbox, Preferences, Beta, Watchlist, Contributions, Log out) that's to the left of my username, which is above any Wikipedia article I'm viewing when logged in. I click on Preferences and my number of edits is shown. That's what I see on an aging Mac laptop, when using Safari as a browser, but you may see something different on your computer. Karenthewriter (talk) 17:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) English[edit] What is a tea house? 41.114.234.36 (talk) 13:32, 23 November 2021 (UTC) On Wikipedia it is a friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia. Theroadislong (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Science[edit] How do you make a tealeaf 41.190.245.5 (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. This is intended to be a friendly place for getting help in using and editing Wikipedia: for general knowledge questions, the reference desk is a better place; or often, you can look at one of our six million articles, such as tea processing. --ColinFine (talk) 14:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Bold, Italics, or Quotes?[edit] I'm writing my first ever article from scratch, albeit I've written essays for practically empty existing articles many times before, so I know what I'm doing. One thing I'm never sure about however, is when to use bold, italics and "quotations." Although I know that "quotations" are used on songs. I'm at one of those situations now, while writing about some early appearances of a former footballer turned rapper. I'm mentioning and referencing a few of the Youtube channel's he appeared on, but as they don't have Wikipedia articles like SB.TV, Mixtape Madness, Link Up TV and GRM Daily do, I'm wondering whether I should put the channel names in bold, italics or "quotations"? Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Can I have an answer please? Danstarr69 (talk) 21:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Sorry you didn't get a reply until now. I guess all our volunteers were busy! We have a 'Manual of Style' which should help you (see WP:MOS), or visit WP:BOLD; WP:ITALICS and WP:QUOTATIONS for detailed guidance. Avoid using bold in articles anywhere except the first sentence to highlight the subject, and possible later on the first use of another term that is synonymous with the page title. Bold should definitely not be used to highlight YouTueb channel names or anything else. Use italics sparingly, for things like scientific names, and use quotation marks only when you actually quote something a person genuinely said (quote it verbatim), followed by a citation to prove that they said it in that exact form. Don't make quotations very large chunks of text, and don't insert song lyrics which will probably be copyright and be instantly removed. Does that answer you now? Nick Moyes (talk) 22:53, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I'm not sure. I've just had a quick look at the articles and the Style Manual seems to help a bit. However the Be Bold article you linked doesn't seem to mention anything about when to use Bold text. And the Italics and "Quotations" articles don't look much use either, especially as the "quotations" thing isn't what I was talking about. When you mention a song, you put the song title in quotation marks like this "Song". Basically what I'm saying is... Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a website/Youtube channel which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a film/TV show which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a music mixtape/EP/LP/album which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention relevant business which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention an award ceremony and its categories which don't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a person who doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Etc etc. Here's an example paragraph, with some of the things mentioned: John Smith collaborated with Jim Smith on the song "Wikipedia is Great." The music video for "Wikipedia is Great" was released on the Youtube channel Wikipedia TV. He then released his album titled Wikipedia: Greatest Hits which won a Wikipedia Award for Best Album. The Wikipedia Awards were broadcast on BBC One. Danstarr69 (talk) 23:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Very recently I learned about MOS:TITLEABSENTBOLD and would recommend not worrying too much about the infinite rules. I'll admit I don't have an ironclad rule for italics/quotations, but whatever decision you go with, consistency within the same article is key. Sometimes certain topics have their own writing guidelines/styles tied to a specific region/grammar set. Generally bold text guidelines are defined in MOS:BOLD, not to be confused with the philosophy of WP:BOLD EDITING. Someone else will help you if need be. Thank you for the question and happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Shushugah Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Text formatting#Italic type From reading the Italics bit in the above link, it basically looks like I should use Italics whenever I want to emphasise something in the middle of a sentence, unless it's a song of course, as I already know that those are highlighted with "quotation marks." Danstarr69 (talk) 00:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Indeed! A fourth scenario that wasn't mentioned. Whether a tangentially related Article exists or doesn't exist, has no impact on whether it should be boldened/italicized or quoted. You may decide depending on its usefulness make a WP:BLUELINK for existing articles, and a WP:REDLINK for non existing articles that have strong potential to become one. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 00:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Visual Editing[edit] Hi, can anybody out here tell me how I can visually edit a table, as in this page. I could figure out how I can add a new row below a specific row, but could not figure out how to change the sl. no of all the following rows, after adding a new row. I could now answer the edit request on that talk page, not only because I could not do it, but because the edit request had not provided relevant details. Anyway, can anyone please tell me the procedure of doing it. For example, consider the following. I want to add a new row after 7th row. And add new details. So what is the procedure, using visual editing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible It's a two step process, involving both Visual Editor and Source Editor. I have copied the source code from the article into my Sandbox as it's too risky playing around with tables directly - and especially as this is just a demo. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 (Note that my edit summary links to the source page where the authors are credited - do this even in your sandbox please, as we need to credit other people's work when we upload it, as it isn't really ours to claim as our own) You'll see I have added my very own, well-known and highly-popular YouTube Channel to a newly inserted row at position 8. You should do that bit most easily in Visual Editor by Selecting Row 7, clicking the Chevron button that appears on the far left of the table and selecting Insert below. Now type in all the information/data that you can, obviously numbering this as Row 8. Ignore the fact that text is not aligned, you'll fix that in the next step. Now save your edits (Publish Changes) then go back in, but via Edit Source so that you're editing the wikimarkup.Do not use VE. Find the row with the newly added data. (Tip: use Ctrl-F to search for my surname, so you're taken straight there.) Find the line containing the position number '8' that you added. It will look likethis: |8 Copy and paste the style command from an existing centred cell and paste it in so it looks like this: | style="text-align:center" |8 Preview it to check it's centred, and repeat elsewhere as necessary. For flags and so forth, find an exisiting row contining what you need and paste that in to the empty cell (also within Source Editor, not in VE) Finally, you will now have to manually edit every subsequent row so that the row number shifts up one to accommodate the newly-inserted row. (You cannot do this automatically as you might using Excel.) It should take you just a few minutes to fix this. I stopped at fixing this at row 20, which is why there are two rows numbered 20 in my demo. Again, don't use VE for this step. Please visit this Help page to appreciate what you can do in Visual Editor and all its limitations. You can't, for example, change colours with VE - you must use source editor. The 1st line of that section I linked to mentions a 'Phabricator' list of tasks to improve VE. Follow it to appreciate what can and can't yet be done. See https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T108245 Whilst you might be frustrated that you can't do everything in Visual Editor, just remember that this tool was devised to make basic editing simpler and more WYSIWYG for beginners. Experienced editors generally tend to avoid Visual Editor and prefer using Source Editor. You are now asking about very complex editing, where either only Source Editor or a combination of both editing tools will be necessary. I hope this all makes sense. Please ping me know when you've done with the stuff in my Sandbox, and I'll then delete the content from it. Nick Moyes (talk) 16:49, 23 November 2021 (UTC) PS: Another little tip for you: Enter as much data as you can in VE. If you can't add what you want, leave some placeholder text like aaaa bbbb ccccc etc in its place. This make it much, much easier to find the right cell to edit late in Source Editor/wikimarkup. Cheers, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:54, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I really don't have words to thank you man. You just helped me beyond imagination. I really did not imagine, you would use your precious time in writing so much for me. I read this page. But could not find any help. But see, you gave me the the necessary page, which has the right information. But I could not find it myself - so foolish. I just sometimes tend to wonder, how some Wikipedians, know about every help page in Wikipedia, and have explored every nook and corner of Wikipedia. They know the exact help pages, for the exact problem, and they know which help page has that needed information. For example see, the page that I was looking into, and the page that you gave me. Such a difference. I thought I might get help from the Visual Editor help page, but you gave me the actual page which has the information that I need, the Help:Table page, under the VE section. Although both the pages may seem to have the same kind of information, but it is a huge difference. And see you also left me a PS: and gave me your great tip. Yes, in that way, it is really easy to find out. Thank you again for helping me learn Wikipedia, and with all the elder Wikipedians' kind help, I am learning so fast. Thanks again. Have a nice Wikipedia career. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes But I cannot figure out one thing, while writing the name of the channel I wrote Itcouldbepossible, but wikipedia is thinking it to be a page, and in the preview section, I see that it is writing like [1], which it thinks to be a link, for further reference you can see that in your sandbox. While yours is not looking like mine. Can you figure out and tell me what is wrong with me. I am always getting confused. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:03, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible The only think "wrong with you" is your wonderful fascination in some of the minutae of Wikipedia. Nerdiness is an asset here, as is a desire to ask questions and to learn. I only hope you then put what you're learning into practice. That's why I was willing to spend time answering someone's technical questions (even though I'm no expert on tables at all - or indeed much else, if I think about it!) The best way to learn from one's errors is first to accept that one must have made a mistake, and then to keep analysing the problem until you suddenly go ahah! that's my mistake. You never forget those types of mistakes, and that's how we learn through life. Although not normally encouraged, I give you permission to go into that section of my sandbox and make an edit there to show me the problem you're encountering. I'm not 100% sure what you're seeing. My link was actually a wikilink to the Teahouse, modified to display my name. (In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity, but might not on yours. A red link is to a page that doesn't exist, whether it's an article page, a user page or something else. The link you've just pasted above was to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/En.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible If you had put it as an external link (using one square bracket), it would look like this: [2] Both would not work becaue you accidentally repeated the en.wikipedia.org elements. You actually needed https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible as an external link, though that would not be appropriate for a table. This also works: Itcouldbepossible - I forced the User: bit to not display by putting a vertical pipe character at the end. Now I think you asked somewhere else about how we learn all this stuff. Watching, reading, doing and making mistakes. It's taken me 10 years of editing to pick up the stuff I'm now happy to share with you, but I was quite able to do most of the basic editing (apart from tables - they're really scary!) after quite a short time. I worry a bit that you're wanting to "run before you can walk", but I hope I've now managed to answer all your various questions. Good luck! Nick Moyes (talk) 11:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes, you are answering all my questions to my content. And you were saying about putting into use what I am learning. Yes, I am doing that. For example when I copied the table from your sandbox to my new tables sandbox, I wrote from whom I have copied the table. What I am wanting to say is that for example I want a wiki link to my talk page, which would show up like "Itcouldbepossible", using the vertical pipe (|) character. Then why cannot I do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very simple. [[User talk:Itcouldbepossible|Itcouldbepossible]] renders as Itcouldbepossible. For help on wikilinks, see Help:Wikilinks. --David Biddulph (talk) 12:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks, that was what I was wanting to do from the beginning. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible If you edit the source to this thread and look at my reply above, you should see exactly how I did it. The alternative is still to use the vertical pipe after your username, but to add different text (either your own name without the User: bit) or as I did when linking you to Albert Einstein! You'll work it out. Nick Moyes (talk) 12:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thank you, I wanted to tell you this from the very beginning. But you could not understand it, anyway, thank you for all the other help that you provided. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Also I want to know how I can turn by wiki redirects to green as you said here - In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:26, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Is it possible to mask external links to read the way I want. I mean Wiki links can be renamed as the editor wishes, is there any way in which external links can be masked, or is it at all possible? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating a page ethically[edit] Creating a page for my boss My boss is adamant that she wants a Wikipedia account (she's a prominent science communication researcher). I think she probably deserves one, but I'm also deeply aware that I'm biased as a prospective page author. Does anyone have any advice for me? I want to make my boss happy, but not by violating Wikipedia guidelines. Lorikie (talk) 14:26, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: You'll need to read and abide by Wikipedia:Conflict of interest. DuncanHill (talk) 14:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lorikie, and welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for being up-front about your situation. Unfortunately, there are some formidable obstacles in the way of you being able to satisfy your boss. As Duncan says, you need to read up about conflict of interest, and further, you need to make the formal declarations that you are a paid editor (it doesn't matter if you are specifically paid to do this, from what you say it is part of your job). Next, you need to drop the idea of "deserving a page", because that assumes that a Wikipedia article is in any way for the benefit of its subject. Of course many people (and other entities) do get some benefit frrom there being a Wikipedia article about them, but that is incidental: Wikipedia has no such purpose, and indeed is indifferent as to whether the subject wants an article about them or does not want an article about them. An article about your boss will not belong to her, will not be under her control, will not necessarily say what she wants it to say, and should be based almost entirely on what people wholly unconnected with her have chosen to publish about her (good or bad!) and not on what she or her associates say or want to say. You might like to show her an article about yourself isn't necessarily a good thing. The counterpart of "deserve" that Wikipedia actually uses is, "does the subject meet Wikipedia's criteria for notability? This is not directly related to prominence, importance, influence, popularity, or any of the other things that you might normally connect with "notability": in essence it is a question of whether there are enough reliably published sources, wholly unconnected with the subject to base an article on. If you and she decide that you still want there to be an article, there are more hurdles. Creating a new article is much more difficult than it looks - I liken it to building a house as your first building project, or playing a public recital after your first violin lesson, and always advise new editors to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" and how Wikipedia works. Editors who do not heed this advice often have a frustrating time as they put in a lot of work and don't understand why their house keeps falling down. Having a conflict of interest you will likely find it even harder, as you will need to basically forget everything you know about your boss, and summarise only what those independent commentators have published. If you decide to go ahead, you need to read your first article, and then use the articles for creation process to create a draft. --ColinFine (talk) 14:57, 23 November 2021 (UTC) If pressed to proceed by your boss, see if there are three or more published articles about her - content at length, not just a name-mention - and then use guidance at Help:Referencing for beginners to create references in proper ref format in your Sandbox. If you cannot find publications about her, then the effort is futile. David notMD (talk) 15:52, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: Is your boss by any chance Laura Lindenfield? If so, I think that you will have a very difficult time finding the sources you'll need for a draft article on a living person in which each and every statement has to have a reliable reference. When I Google her name, I get a number of sources but they are virtually all based on interviews (or are on websites clearly linked to her), so are not WP:INDEPENDENT. The nearest I can find that might be OK is this one at science.org which probably reaches the WP:SIGCOV for notability (specifically in her case WP:NACADEMIC) but still seems, by using language like "She is passionate about...", to take a tone that Wikipedia would not use (see WP:NPOV). Your best bet, I think, is to draft a very short article using such independent sources and then not be too disappointed if the Draft is declined: that will at least prove you have tried! Make sure you start by complying with the mandatory disclosures described at WP:PAID. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Text Allignment[edit] Any idea on text alignment in table. I want to center align some text in tables, using visual editor. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:44, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible I think you'd probably need to use wikisource code for that, using the "text-align:center; parameter. PS: I've tweaked the demo warning you placed on your sandbox page as you'd left the nowiki commands in which stop it from working. So the warning now looks like it's come from me, but obviously isn't a real vandalism warning. The best way to leave warnings is to enable WP:TWINKLE in your Preferences. Then it does it automatically for you via menu options, plus a whole lot more. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thanks for the edit. I know it is not a real vandalism warning. It is just my sandbox. If I had done something wrong, then you would have told me in the talk page. But anyway to get to the point, I have already TWINKLE enabled. I used it to start delete discussions, and got myself blocked for being thought to be a sockpuppet, since that page was created by another sock, and the sock with whom the checkusers thought me to be linked had edit warred with the previous sock. Anyway thats not the point. What you are saying is that it will give me warnings. Can you specify what warning, or what type of warnings??? Also it would be really kind of you, if you could tell me in a more precise way of how to use wikisource code, suddenly while I am writing in normal language. For example I am using "text-align:center" here, but nothing is happening. Please tell me the way, to center text in a table while using visual or source editor. Thanks for the answer, and regards. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible As I replied to you on my sandbox, it's important that you are editing tables and complex entries in WP:Source Editor not Visual Editor. Did you follow my instructions on how to switch between them, and did it work? You will get nowhere with anything other than the simplest of tables if you stick to VE. The parameter I mentioned above is wiki markup - as written with Source Editor. So, go to the table I put in my sandbox for you at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 Click 'Edit Source' next to the heading to open the section in Source Editor. (Tell me if that function is not showing, as it means you've not forced it to display via your personal Preferences setting. My default is for it to offer me both editing tools all the time - it should be yours, too, especially if you're working on tables.) Search for the word 'center' and you'll see 101 examples - one controlling each cell of data. Regarding WP:TWINKLE: Go to your own userpage. Use the drop down menu box marked 'TW' to access the Twinkle menu. The first sub-item is WARN. This opens a menu box for you to explore the various options. Try leaving yourself a first level warning against vandalism, then a second, and then a third. I can't explain all the options here for you - we expect editors to very carefully' learn for themselves how to use these powerful tools (which can easily upset other users). So read the TWINKLE page and the accompanying Documentation to understand what it can do. But it covers most of the common issues of edit waring, content removal, addition of uncited content, harassment, conflict of interest, spamming, plus single issue notices like encouragement to use edit summaries, biting newcomers, etc etc. There is a complete list of warning templates (here). Nick Moyes (talk) 10:33, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes the edit source function is showing. Also I thought that you were telling me of editing error warnings, so I asked what type of warnings. I had pasted that warning in my sandbox just to see how it looks. I knew how to use twinkle. For the table related thing, I want to know where should I place "text-align:center; parameter? I have made my edit on your sandbox. You can see that, and tell me if it is right or wrong. You will see that the table I created, it has some errors. For the channel name column I thought of adding my talk page and then renaming the wiki link as "Itcouldbepossible". But it showed up like this: ([3]) - why??? While your wiki link it redirects it to the teahouse it shows Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel? How come??? Why cannot I edit my wiki link to show my username, while on clicking it redirects to my talk page. For example yours show Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel and it redirects to WP:TH Why is mine not like that?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 11:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Tables[edit] Today I was editing random articles, when I came across Nach Baliye. I was reading the article, trying to find for any errors, when I came across this table [4]. I just sort of went mad seeing this table. Just a well formatted and advanced table, with all the color schemes, and just nice cell merging. Can anyone, for heaven's sake tell me how that table was created with all those attractive features. I don't really think that the Wiki markup was typed out. There must be some modern graphical interface, for doing such a tedious thing. I want to know how that table was created. I would really be glad, if I get the answer from someone who is an expert in this matter, and has been editing Wikipedia for a couple of years, because, I want the exact and precise method of creating such a table. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:58, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I've been editing for over 10 years and wouldn't dare to create such a thing. I have, however, created very long data tables by starting in Excel, getting all the sorting, the text and the wikilinks and in the right places before exporting it with a tool to Wikimarkup. But I'm not aware of a tool to make tables look pretty like that - so I shall await for answers from other users more experienced in such things, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: It takes work, often over time with improvements by different editors, often starting with copying the format from another page. The first similar table in the article was added by an IP here with edit summary "added table like other shows Jhalak". That may refer to Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart or an earlier season. It could maybe be tracked further back but I haven't tried. Help:Table has general help but it's complicated. Much of it is the same or similar as HTML tables which some editors already know. PrimeHunter (talk) 16:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @PrimeHunter Yes, but how did that specific table appear in Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart. How was it created??? And also I wanted to know one thing, how on Earth did you find that specific page history, when the table was added?? I have seen many people doing so. Is their anyway of finding out when a specific edit was first made, and the what edits followed?? I really don't think that you flicked through the page history. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible There are various ways to find when an edit was first made. The slow way is to look at 500 edits in View History at a time. Let's assume that covers the entire history (if not, just increase the number to 5000 in the url bar), then you can find a rough midway point, click (and note down) the date you clicked. Is the edit showing there? IF yes, go down and divide the lower half of edits into half again, and select another date to click. Is the edit there? If 'No', then it will have been made between those two date points. Divide the edits roughly in half again and then again until you find the first one where that edit was made. Doing this in conjunction with looking at View History (green numbers are positive count of bytes added/red are negative overall additions) makes this just a few minutes work. It took me just a few moments to do that for Nach Baliye, speeded up by using Ctrl-F to search for 'Scoring Chart', of which there were 823 mentions in the edit summaries. I went to the lowest one, then scrolled down a dozen or so edits further and found a massive addition by an IP on 9 March 2019 with a very helpful edit summary. Job done. Of course, that's the slow way. For simplest way to find when a short text string was first added to an article is to copy it, then go to the View History tab. Just above all the row entries, click Find addition/removal to use the 'WikiBlame' tool. Be aware that by default it only searches 500 of the latest edits before the date selected. So it will miss the first addition of text if it's a very heavily edited page as this one is unless you spend time to understand how to take advantage of the tool's searching features. I wouldn't use it to search for a chart being added, but I might focus on just one unique element or keyword in that chart. Hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks, I learnt a new thing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 10:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the answer. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Prime Healthcare[edit] My interest in CAlifornia health systems drew me to Prime Healthcare, where I was struck by the difference in how Wiki editors handle the material. Whereas large systems such as Sutter and Kaiser are given the opportunity to list history, background, hospital names, etc, Prime's editing history is aggressive and heavy handed. The result is a page listing controversy and nothing else. Prime owns 45 hospitals nationwide, employs 50000 people, but you wouldn't know it by Wiki. BTW I am in no way affiliated or compensated by Prime; my research is for a graduate program. I'm just amazed at the discrepancy and poor treatment. I haven't researched it enough to determine whether sources should be improved on deleted materials, but that is different than what edit history shows. Any attempts to improve the page are immediately deleted wholesale, in apparent violation of Wiki editing rules. (I attempted to undo some edits myself) Can anyone explain this? Prime owner Prem Reddy has made a number of enemies with his handling of labor, etc. Is that at play here? Archie515 (talk) 16:46, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Prime Healthcare Services Karenthewriter (talk) 17:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Archie515. Welcome to the Teahouse! You can discuss the issue about the content of the article on the article's talk page. The concerned editors might engage in the conversation and help you in finding a possible solution. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 17:24, 23 November 2021 (UTC) thanks but page monitors refuse to allow access and have not responded to talk page requests in the past. Now locked out from making any changes to sources. Page is an embarrassment to all Wiki contributors. Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC)Archie515Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The Controversy section is well supported by reliable published sources. It's Prime Healthcare that should be embarrassed. Maproom (talk) 23:04, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Archie515: I see you posted twice at Talk:Prime Healthcare Services. The last piece of advice you were given there was to make a specific request. I suggest you think about the worst problem with the article, and then post a specific detailed suggestion on the talk page, such as: Please change the current article text "_____________" to "_____________" based on the independent reliable source found at ___________________. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Disambiguation-links tag on redirects[edit] In this edit I intentionally changed a redirect from targeting an article to targeting a disambiguation page. To my surprise, the "adding disambiguation links" tag was added. In a way, it makes sense (I added a link to a disambiguation page), but on the other hand, the tag is probably meant for when someone adds a link in an article without knowing it's a disambiguation page, like if I added a link to Georgia or Mercury in an article. Can something be changed so that this tagging isn't activated when the end result of the edit is a redirect? I reported this at WP:EF/FP but was sent here for a reason I don't understand: the responding editor said both that the tag isn't activated and that it's working properly. 72.77.45.188 (talk) 17:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The edit filter (which interdicts edits) is separate from the tagging system (which describes what an edit is). —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 17:38, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Do anyone think like that?[edit] Are there people actually thinking that this page represents a universal and unbiased point of view? Owerthise (talk) 18:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I think like that. It doesn't seem biased to me. What direction do you think it's biased in? Maproom (talk) 18:43, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think there is such a thing as an universal point of view, certainly not about a topic connected to religion. It looks neutral to me; it may not be perfect (no article is) but there are no obvious problems. --bonadea contributions talk 19:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Owerthise: Welcome to the Teahouse! If you have a specific suggestion to improve the article, please post it on Talk:Muhammad with a reliable source and the {{edit extended-protected}} template, and another editor will review your request. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Help with revision[edit] Hello! I'm trying to revise the first two paragraphs of the Cultural context section of Cueva de las Manos and I need help with it. I've already put in a copy edit request for the whole page with the Guild of Copyeditors, but I was wondering if there was a group/person willing to help with this particular section in the meantime. I'm trying to revise the section in accordance with the following advice of FunkMonk in the talk page: There is some repetition in how you describe the paintings were returned to and were influential for the people throughout many thousands of years, perhaps check if someone of it can be consolidated or made less similar. If anyone would be willing to lend a hand in this respect it would be much appreciated. If there is a better place to ask for such help, I would be grateful if someone could point me there. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Best, Tyrone Madera (talk) 18:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) This might be better for the Talk Page, but one possible way to consolidate this might be to write this instead, which combines two separate statements: However, that so many people contributed to the artwork for thousands of years suggests the cave held great significance for the artists, with earlier groups influencing later ones through a continuous narrative, playing out over millennia. But that's just one possibility. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 18:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing this Ayaelmelegy (talk) 22:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Ayaelmelegy, and welcome to the Teahouse. I'm afraid there is quite a lot you need to do before that draft is publishable. The things that caught my attention are: Remove all the links to interviews. There are restrictions on the use of External links in articles, and in any case Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. Format all the references so that a reviewer can readily evaluate which of them are likely to be most reliable and independent. See REFB, and WP:NONENG. With you anonymous URLs it is hard to see whether your draft establishes that she meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. Remove all the evaluative language. No article should ever describe anything in Wikipedia's voice as "one of the most important" or "much needed". I get that you strongly approve of Hamdy's work, but none of that must come out in the article: it must be a neutral summary of what the independent sources say about her - and if there is criticism, then you should probably summarise that too. (You can quote a source that described something as "important" or "much needed" but you need to make sure that it is a source which is wholly unconnected with the subject). Please also see WP:NOTSOAPBOX. --ColinFine (talk) 23:12, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I did some edits would you please check them? Thank you — Preceding unsigned comment added by Ayaelmelegy (talk • contribs) 00:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) new wikipedia page[edit]  2600:1700:9C80:62E0:89ED:2A1E:FE48:ACD3 (talk) 22:08, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome. If you want to create a new article(not a page), that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content. If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Unregistered users(as well as new accounts) cannot directly create new articles. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) What do you do on this page[edit]  Jenay Ava (talk) 22:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Jenay Ava Welcome to the Teahouse. What we do is welcome new users and assist them with any problems they may encounter whilst editing Wikipedia. We recognise that it can be a steep learning curve to begin with, so we try to make that journey a little smoother for you in the hope that you will stick around and become one of our many regular contributors. Unfortunately, looking at your very first few contributions, I fear you think Wikipedia talk pages might be like a chat forum. They are not, and all we do here is help build the worlds greatest online encyclopaedia, and use the talk pages to assist us in that task. You'd be most welcome to help with this undertaking (6.2 million+ article in English so far), but this place is not a social media chat site. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:40, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Help writing a page[edit] I have the page written and now need to post to wikipedia, I have akk the references. Please help, FletcherEmma (talk) 23:37, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @FletcherEmma welcome to Tea House!. If you want to create a new article, that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content.If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. I have been editing the errors on Draft:Gehad Hamdy for while. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing? Thank you. Ayaelmelegy (talk) 00:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, some things need to be improved: (1) the article must have a lead portion (the introduction should not have a heading), (2) there should not be no links or Arabic letters in section headings, (3) there is too much text in the infobox, and Arabic text isn't needed there. There are other things, but you can start with this. Regards. — Alalch Emis (talk) 00:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) STATUS: Draft nominated for Speedy deletion and creating editor blocked as suspected sock (denies). David notMD (talk) 01:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have overhauled (Major Cleanup) the article (This specifically). Jairus is doing... ?? 02:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ayaelmelegy: Draft:Gehad Hamdy has no references in the "Biography" and "Speak Up" sections. Please add more independent reliable sources to your draft before submitting for AfC. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 06:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) GoingBatty, "Ayaelmelegy" got an indefinite block six hours before your last (and of course well-intentioned) message. -- Hoary (talk) 12:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Ongoing Events Section[edit] What happened with the ongoing events section on both the desktop website and the mobile website? It used to be a nicely categorized, bulleted set of news. But not it's just hyperlinks to specific wikipedia pages. I would use the previous style daily, it was a wonderful source for news. I wonder if there is a good reason for removing it, or if it was potentially even an oversight. Regardless I loved that feature and don't want to lose it :( 47.229.202.202 (talk) 01:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Are you confusing Portal:Current events/Sidebar and Portal:Current events? Both are linked from "In the news" on Main Page, on "Ongoing" and "Other recent events". PrimeHunter (talk) 02:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Rv tags[edit] Hello. Is it possible to remove tags? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Possibly - which tags were you considering removing, and why? GoingBatty (talk) 06:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty, no, I've no reason, I've seen some users who edit without any tags. So I asked. Can the tags be removed without any reason? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: When tags are removed from an article, it's assumed that the problems they highlight have been resolved. If an editor feels that a tag was removed prematurely, they'll add it back at their own discretion. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Tenryuu, I didn't tell about the tags of article. I told about editing tags such as "2017 wikitext editor". Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 07:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: There is a difference between Wikipedia:Tags and Wikipedia:Templates I see you removed the {{under construction}} template from the Carlos Moguel Jr. article in this edit, but you cannot remove the tag "2017 wikitext editor" from the edit. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 07:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Those are not removable. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reftoolbar[edit] How to change the date format for Reftoolbar? from Dmy to mdy. Thanks. —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Welcome to the Teahouse! It appears that there is a discussion about this at Wikipedia talk:RefToolbar#Date formats. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) User level[edit] Hi, I wanted to know how I can add a user level. I mean there will be a bar on my user page, and it will fill up as I edit articles. And beside it would be written, my next user level. Any idea on how to do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Here's a workaround, Itcouldbepossible. Just edit articles, constructively. Soon you will be "extended confirmed". Most people are, and few people will be surprised or much interested to know that you are. There are some other very minor superpowers that you can acquire; but again, few people will be interested. Some superpowers are a bit out of the ordinary, and you might want to advertise one or other of these; on the other hand, advertising them may seem somewhat vulgar. Best is to aim to be an article-improving Clark Kent. -- Hoary (talk) 11:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible Welcome to Tea House! As @Itcouldbepossible stated, it's rarely of interest to anyone else. This essay on WP:HATCOLLECTING could be useful on the mostly harms/some benefits of gamifying your user page with statistics. I do indulge myself with Wikipedia:Service awards as a way of marking specific tiers of editing. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 12:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Dead Links[edit] I see that many pages have something called 'dead links'. What are these so called 'dead links', and how can I make them alive again?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) For information about dead links, read WP:Dead links. --David Biddulph (talk) 09:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks again for the answer Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Add (journalist) to title[edit] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anshuman_Tiwari Can you write this in brackets as journalist because it is journalist? You can write Journalist in back of their name in brackets. Coolblack4 (talk) 10:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Coolblack4, and welcome to the Teahouse. We use a term in parenthesis like that in an article title only when it is necessary to distinguish between different people (or other subjects) with the same name. See WP:Disambiguation. --ColinFine (talk) 11:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Something drastic certainly should be done to this article. Sample: In digital journalism, he has created and successfully established an innovative and exclusive multilingual digital first content vertical moneybhaskar.com for Danik Bhaskar Group, DB Corp. It is the largest Hindi business portal and offers guidance, utility and wisdom based jargon free economic-business and investment content to aspiring readers in Hindi. (For one thing, I wonder what is being excluded.) -- Hoary (talk) 12:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Distracting AFC submission templates[edit] Does anyone know how to collapse or get the "this topic is not notable" AFC submission templates out of the way? I'm trying to work on a draft article, and they're distracting and take up about half of the page. wizzito | say hello! 12:43, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Those templates were put there for the benefit of reviewers, and of anyone who might want to work on improving the draft. You should not remove or collapse them. That's why they all say "Do not remove this line!" Maproom (talk) 13:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thing is, they are INCREDIBLY distracting to look at, I at least want to move them to the bottom at the page if I can't collapse or make them invisible. I just can't have them taking up 90% of the page from the top, it bothers me a lot and prevents me from working. wizzito | say hello! 13:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Reality shifting has been Declined three times and Rejected twice. I have restored the Declined and Rejection and Comments to the top of the article, where those belong. David notMD (talk) 14:23, 24 November 2021 (UTC) If you believe you can rescue this with better references, do so, but be aware that Rejected drafts are likely to be deleted and 'salted.' Make sure you have an off-Wikipedia copy. And understand that 'salted' means that an Administrator's approval would be needed to try again to create a draft on this topic. David notMD (talk) 14:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there seriously no way to get these to the bottom of the page (where they are still visible) or make them look less distracting? Your comments aren't helping me, sorry. Also, I am still working on the article; I had to rewrite it from scratch because the original user who created the draft made it look very bad and had bad formatting and grammar. (Also, they kept resubmitting it multiple times despite not addressing the concerns, I haven't submitted it yet.) It isn't anything speedy deletable (see Wikipedia:Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity), there's a Washington Post report and a scholarly article on the subject, but probably just needs to be worked on and more RS might need to be made before it gets published. wizzito | say hello! 14:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Declines and Rejections are considered a required part of draft history, so that the next reviewer can check if the weaknesses identified by previous reviewers have been addressed. Given that you have taken over a draft created and edited by other editors, you can leave a Comment to that effect with the other Comments. David notMD (talk) 14:39, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there no way to at least move it to a part of the page where it's visible by people contributing and reviewers, but not as distracting as a glob that takes up the first part of the page? If not, I may just have to move it to my userspace and work on it from there. wizzito | say hello! 14:42, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David notMD noting for the record I have reverted you; @Wizzito offers up a convincing reason why they moved them down, because it was distracting for them, and as long as they move them back up before resubmitting I see no issue with that move. That is ignoring the question whether or not these templates are relevant at all considering the rewrite currently ongoing, although it appears that at least some of the original text still exists. -- Asartea Talk | Contribs 15:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have added a Comment that you are in the process of completely revising the draft. Do as much as you can before submitting. I know nothing about the topic, but will mention that as it stand now, the lead is over-referenced. Pick at most three refs to support the Lead. Those refs and the others may be used in the body of the article, as more detail on history, reception, criticism, etc. is added. David notMD (talk) 14:47, 24 November 2021 (UTC) That's because I was working on it, putting the references in so I can use them later, and then delete the ref in the lead when I've finished reviewing the source and using it to source statements. You act like a draft should have the same standards as mainspace, and besides, I moved it to userspace anyways so I can work on it. wizzito | say hello! 14:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You didn't move it, you copied & pasted the content, so please read about copying within Wikipedia. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I want to pitch in from an outside editor. 5 declined templates, 2 separate comments, and 1 draft template? I know if I was unaware of all Wikipedia policies, this would feel very WP:BITEy to me. Is there not a better solution, in the form of an {{articlehistory}} style template? I understand why the need for all the notices (for future reviewers to know at a glance), but there can be so many better ways to do this now. --JackFromWisconsin (talk | contribs) 14:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I feel like a lot of people in this thread are being BITEy too... wizzito | say hello! 15:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My intention was to proffer advice on how to create a draft that is more likely to be accepted. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I understand, but I feel as if my questions weren't answered and were just met with a "don't do this" or "don't do that" and reverts. wizzito | say hello! 15:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Tendentious editing[edit] This is not marked as an essay. This is also not marked with the green symbol for policy, guidelines pages. So, how important are these types of guideline pages? Knight Skywalker (talk) 12:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very important. It's a supplementary explantion to the guideline WP:DE, and carries the same status. Mjroots (talk) 13:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Mjroots: If this is very important, then why Wikipedia is not including the green symbol in the box? --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I didn't use the bold format, but still the above lines are showing as in bold to me. --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You used the bold format by putting a semi-colon before the colon at the start of the line. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I've fixed the bold. Mjroots (talk) 16:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) This page is not one of Wikipedia's policies or guidelines, as it has not been thoroughly vetted by the community. Also it has category. Wikipedia essays (?) (±) Knight Skywalker (talk) 17:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Markup[edit] Is there any introduction page, or help page, or user guide page for Wikipedia Markup. If there is then please provide me. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Itcouldbepossible, you may be looking for Help:Wikitext. DanCherek (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks for the Wiki Help page, I am surely going to read it. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Page[edit] As you see now, my talk page has become a little clumsy. What is the way to make it clean? Should I archive them or is there any other option? Seeking for options. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: While you're allowed to delete conversations from your own talk page, archiving is recommended because it makes it more convenient for you and other editors to find those old conversations in the future. There are a few different ways to archive a talk page – you can do it manually or have a bot help you – and there is more information about each of those at Help:Archiving a talk page. DanCherek (talk) 14:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek I have archived the archival messages left by a bot on my talk page and have shifted them here. But I cannot move the three notification to three different headings, it is coming under a single heading. Please can you help me in that respect. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The first section starts with {| so you need to end it with |}. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Newcomers[edit] How, can I find all newcomers on Wikipedia??? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:08, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: You can find them at Special:Log/newusers but for what purpose ? 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA (talk) 15:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) IP blocking for 31 hours[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… I hope you don’t mind me asking this question: When administrators impose a block on IP addresses for the first time, the length of the block is usually 31 hours (1 day, 7 hours). Do you have any idea why administrators chose this value? Thanks. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 15:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC). It's so that they don't just wait 24 and return to the same things. 31h is also a standard length in the blocking dropdown menu and has been since before I was an admin. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Imagine a kid messing around in study hall, causing a school's IP to be blocked. A 24-hour block would allow him or her to come back the next day during the same period to cause more trouble. Deor (talk) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Amkgp is Sock editing[edit] Hi, first I was blocked on the ground of thinking to be a sockpuppet, and the sockpuppet investigation was raised by an ipv6 ip 2402:3A80:6E1:9A2E:A110:65A0:5AD7:4F15. The sock investigation page is here. In the Clerk, CheckUser, and/or patrolling admin comments section Blablubbs commented and said The filer is obviously Amkgp loutsocking. I blocked them for a bit. Then after the block expired then again another comment was added by ipv6 user 2402:3A80:1A4E:9197:C5B8:CED1:C0FD:9A1D, and then blablubbs blocked the ipv6 again. When it was proved that I am not a sockpuppet, this ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:A17E:9C61:AA1F:59E2:32A2 came and added welcomed me. Till date, I could not understand anything, why an ipv6 was coming an leaving me messages on my talk page. Today again an ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA came and gave me a vandalism warning on an edit that I made two articles namely, Piet van der Sluijs and Dré Saris, where I had only added a more reference needted tag using twinkle. It was my mistake or not is a far matter, but then he leaves me another link to learn wikipedia in under an hour link. He also answers one of my questions in the teahouse. The thing is all these ipv6 start with 2402:3A80, and blablubbs has stated previously that it is block evasion of sock amkgp. Now what is to be done? Should I raise a sockpuppet investigation request?? Would it be possible to block just huge range ipv6s? Please give me suggestion in this matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 16:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Also in there sockpuppet investigation page [[5]] we can see that the suspected sock puppets ipv6 also starts with 2402:3A80. We can also see that he got blocked because he used to edit logged out for a couple of time, and he was blocked for that reason. And also in a further section we see that he also used or uses 2409:4061::/36 this ipv6 range. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Itcouldbepossible (talk • contribs) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Article Not Published - not adequate sources[edit] Hi, I am trying to publish an article about a triceratops skull nicknamed 'Dragon King' which was sold last year which is the biggest skull ever found, but the article was rejected due to a lack of sources. The sale was private so there wasn't a lot of press generated, but what there was is referenced. The skull is definitely the biggest in the world. How would I go about validating that? Would an image of the skull with dimensions count? What could I use to validate it. Any suggestions would be very welcome. I should make clear that I have no financial stake in this at all, it is simply a fact that the skull is the biggest found and I think should be public information. Maudjohnson90 (talk) 16:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Maudjohnson90 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Wikipedia articles summarize what publicly available independent reliable sources say about a topic. If a topic is not sufficiently covered in such sources, it cannot be on Wikipedia. Documents in private hands or otherwise not available to the public cannot be used as sources here. Did no sources cover this sale, or its discovery? If some did, but not enough for a standalone article, there may be an existing article this could be mentioned in. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Shouldn't you first put any reliable information at Triceratops#Size, Maudjohnson90? That's a pretty well-watched article and if you think that particular skull needs another full article, you could discuss that on the Talk Page at Talk:Triceratops Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:59, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks Mike Turnbull! I have added information under Triceratops#Skull and that has remained since I added it. I'll discuss on the Talk Page as suggested. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Maudjohnson90 (talk • contribs) 17:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Final Publish[edit] Hello Sir, how much time does it take for the draft to get finally published ? Thank you. Johnalphanso (talk) 17:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You have not created nor submitted a draft to Articles for Creation. Is there a particular draft you are interested in? — Preceding unsigned comment added by David notMD (talk • contribs) 18:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Johnalphanso, and welcome to the Teahouse. There is no simple answer to your quewstion: a draft takes as long to be published as it takes. There is no queue, no schedule, no deadline: all editors are volunteers, and work on what they choose when they choose. If you're talking about Draft:Sanskar Desai, that will not get reviewed until it is submitted for review (add {{subst:AFC/draft}} to the top). But it will not get accepted until somebody follows Theroadislong's advice in the comment and removes all the unreliable sources from the list. It will likely not get accepted until somebody reformats the references from a useless list of URLs to a meaningful set of citations - see CITE. There are probably other things that need improving too: in particular, the question of whether it has been worked on by a paid editor. --ColinFine (talk) 18:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How do I contribute images?[edit]  Bettertoseeit (talk) 19:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Bettertoseeit Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please review WP:UPIMAGE carefully. It's not as easy to do as it may appear. You must be autoconfirmed(account is four days old with 10 edits or more) to upload images yourself, but you can visit Files for upload to get assistance with doing so if not autoconfirmed. 331dot (talk) 19:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating Book Pages[edit] Hello. One of the reasons I became an editor was an interest in filling some of the gaps in bibliographies I am familiar with. What I'm unsure about is if an author has a large bibliography with Wiki articles already created for most of their books (for example; Stephen Baxter bibliography), am I safe in assuming I can create pages for those novels which do not have an article, or might the lack of an article be for a reason? Thanks in advance. John Bullock (talk) 20:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Such novels still have to be independently notable. Ruslik_Zero 20:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Jbullock83 Welcome to Tea House! In general, a notable author does not mean their books are automatically notable and vice versa, see WP:NOTINHERIT, however in the book specific Wikipedia:Notability (books) guidelines, it does mention certain famous authors' books are likely to be automatically notable. Anything by Jane G. Austin for example, but another editor may disagree. Looking at specific notability criteria for the books themselves would be the most forward process. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 20:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the info/reply! Ruslik, Shushugah. John Bullock (talk) 21:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) ASIAN MONTH[edit] i would like to ask if my translated ( not fully complete article counts for the ediathon asian month in order to get a postcard Georgekagian (talk) 21:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian Welcome to Tea House! Your question is better asked on Wikipedia talk:Wikipedia Asian Month/2021 but if you add {{WAM talk 2021}} to the talk page of said article, a WikiProject judge will determine its eligibility for you. I doubt a full translation is needed, since each article can be independently edited anyways. It needs to comply with English Wikipedia WP:5 Principles whereas it may differ in other languages. Thank you for the question and happy editing! Good luck with the edit-a-thon! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 21:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian, looking at here, it looks like it counts unless it was a pure machine translation (e.g. Google Translate) that you didn't copy edit to correct any errors. {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 21:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1057009594" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 21:50 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH RudolfRed, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 Autoconfirmed user 2 Template:Uw-create-kept 3 Audio sample 4 How to create Article page for Musical Artist 5 section formatting 6 Citing Manga 7 Problem with visual editor 8 How can I remove a website from spam or black list? 9 Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page 10 Verify my article and undelete it 11 "Can you plz help" 12 Sandbox 13 Biology 14 Help moving my draft 15 Paw partol 16 Reaching a consensus 17 I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page 18 Why i cant see my name on wikipedia?? 19 Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps 20 pokemon showdown 21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath 22 I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ? 23 A Request to add Template to talk page 24 Is Imslp a good source to back up my information? 25 Vandalism 26 My Talk Archives vanished 27 Heading correction 28 Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search? 29 how do i seen how many edits i have 30 English 31 Science 32 Bold, Italics, or Quotes? 33 Visual Editing 34 Creating a page ethically 35 Text Allignment 36 Wiki Tables 37 Prime Healthcare 38 Disambiguation-links tag on redirects 39 Do anyone think like that? 40 Help with revision 41 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 42 new wikipedia page 43 What do you do on this page 44 Help writing a page 45 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 46 Ongoing Events Section 47 Rv tags 48 Reftoolbar 49 User level 50 Dead Links 51 Add (journalist) to title 52 Distracting AFC submission templates 53 Wikipedia:Tendentious editing 54 Wikipedia Markup 55 My Talk Page 56 Newcomers 57 IP blocking for 31 hours 58 Amkgp is Sock editing 59 Article Not Published - not adequate sources 60 Final Publish 61 How do I contribute images? 62 Creating Book Pages 63 ASIAN MONTH Most recent archives 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131, 1132 Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yep, @Patrick Vedel you should just close that and/or any other notes you might have and proceed to edit said article. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The sentences 2 - 5 are there in case they don't know about them. Faster than Thunder (talk) 06:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: & @Nick Moyes: thank you for guidance. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 07:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) How to create Article page for Musical Artist[edit]  Jasonseah69 (talk) 23:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69 Welcome to the Teahouse, and thank you for asking. Creating a Wikipedia article from scratch is the hardest task for anyone to achieve here - especially for a newcomer. Trying to write one about yourself is fraught with problems and issues, and will be seen as WP:PROMOTION. See our Conflict of Interest and AUTOBIOGRAPHY advice, too. But most of all, see WP:NMUSIC - this is a shortcut link to our essential Notability criteria for musicians. If you cannot find multiple, independent, in-depth sources that have written about you in detail (ignore your own PR output), and you don't meet any of the music notability criteria, then I'm afraid there's no chance. But if you feel you do meet those criteria, it's still best to leave it to someone who wants to write about you - not try to do it yourself. That person should then gain experience in editing here for some time, and then read This Guide on creating an article and submitting it for review through our Articles for Creation process, before it goes through our final 'New Page Review' process and is allowed to remain in the encyclopaedia. That's a brief outline of the process. Please do not attempt to use your Wikipedia WP:USERPAGE to write about yourself, or it will be deleted. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Good advice above. NB take "someone who wants to write about you" to mean "someone who, unprompted, wants to write about you". Not somebody asked (let alone paid) to do so. -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69: Welcome to the teahouse. You can create an article, or just submit using a draft for the Articles for Creation. However, if there aren't any sources, if may be deleted, so take your own risks for creating an article, or for less risks, create a draft. To create one, go to Wikipedia:Draft. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Severestorm28, please be aware that Jasonseah69 has only made three edits, is not autoconfirmed, and therefore cannot create an article directly. Also, their user page has been deleted as G11 - unambiguous advertising or promotion. Cullen328 (talk) 01:26, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cullen328: Next time-if someone is not autoconfirmed, and advertising, I'm giving them a warning. Thanks for the reminder. Severestorm28 (talk) 14:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) section formatting[edit] I had a draft reviewed and the reviewer suggested I use "==Section Formatting==". I cannot find any information on ==Section Formatting== on any of the help pages. Can someone send me a link which explains what ==Section Formatting== is and how to implement it? I appreciate the review and suggestions. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Looking at your draft, it's divided into headings using bold text titles, which isn't how articles are typically ordered here. If you replace the bold formatting on your section titles with two equals signs on either side, it'll create a more traditional section header for each title, which also then forces the page to create a table of contents and allows easier navigation. ??????? ? 00:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Thank You. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:47, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage COURTESY: Draft:Peebles Homestead You fixed that, but there are other problems. Several descriptive paragraphs have no references. Much of the content about his military service is general history, i.e., not about him (nor is it about the house). Hence, not relevant. David notMD (talk) 02:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) your draft has great promise. The section on the homestead today used one reference source three times, so I reformatted the citations so that the references are combined. You did a good job of finding references, can any of your sources be used for paragraphs that have no references? If not, where did you find the data about the house dimensions and construction details? If it was from a published source (such as a history book or local newspaper article) those can be used as a reference. Unfortunately, if it was from an unpublished source (such as handwritten notes found at a historical society) that would be considered original research and can't be used as a reference. You'll need to do some more work on your draft, but I'm sure it can be improved enough to be accepted. Keep up the good work. Karenthewriter (talk) 09:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Ownership gap between 1838 and 1994. David notMD (talk) 10:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Karenthewriter, Thanks for combining my multiple citations; I couldn't figure that out! The dimensions for the house (and other observations) came from me. I measured the house to see if the dimensions matched the 1798 Tax records, but I'm sure I can find them in other sources, especially the State Museum Survey. Also, I think the few sentences about Peebles' military record are relevant, because his military service adds credibility to the comment that the property could be eligible for the National Register. Without a notable person, places like Monticello and Montpelier would just be old brick houses. I could insert his military service elsewhere. Thoughts? Granted, Peebles service and the Cumberland County Militia could be separate articles which I can't do right now. I will clean up my citations. SharedHeritage (talk) 01:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @SharedHeritage: To answer your original question, see MOS:SECTIONS. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 05:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) I'm glad I could help with your multiple citations. I've been an editor since 2007 and I just recently mastered that skill. There's a lot to learn. As David notMD stated the information about Peebles military service isn't about the homestead you're writing about, so a reviewer might feel its unnecessary. (I'm not a reviewer, so I am no expert on that subject.) You mention Peebles received two different land grants. Did he receive any of his land due to his military service? If so you could state that, which would tie in the homestead with him being in the military. I live in northwest Pennsylvania, and some of the area's earliest settlers apparently received land because of their Revolutionary War service, so that's why I asked about the land grants. One thing you need to be aware of is that Wikipedia does not want any original research, or writers speculating on what happened. (To quote Sergeant Friday from the old TV show Dragnet – "Just the facts, ma'am.") So I'm a bit concerned about such phrases as "it is reasonable to believe that the windows are original..." and "The two front doors were likely replaced at this time," for that reads as though you are guessing or giving an opinion. You can quote someone and say that researcher Joe Smart-Guy believes the windows are original, and give a reference citation, but don't make it sound as though it's your conclusion. Remember that you're writing an encyclopedia article for the general reading public, and not trying to convince a historical commission to add the house to the National Register. I hope I'm not overwhelming your with details, but I'm aware that writing for Wikipedia means following Wikipedia rules. Best wishes on your research and writing project. Karenthewriter (talk) 05:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Manga[edit] Hi, I'm new to Wikipedia. I am currently trying to figure out how to add a small detail to a page about Kennedy Space Center in Pop Culture. I'm wondering how I should cite the manga volumes of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure for the details I need. Should I use a pre-existing source on Wikipedia to the volumes that links to the publisher's website, or should i use the ISBN and author info as my citation? Cheese420 (talk) 04:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Author, book title, place, publisher, year, ISBN, and page number, Cheese420. And perhaps additional info besides, such as details of the original publication. -- Hoary (talk) 05:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cheese420 I'm going to disagree with @Hoary here. For a WP-pop cult section, you don't cite the manga, you cite a WP:RS that noticed that the manga had the KSC in it and bothered to write something about it, like at least some of the films are mentioned at [1]. Anything in that section without a decent secondary source should be removed. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) That would be better, yes. (But I'd rather got the impression that that was a lost cause.) If a secondary source comments on the pop culture item and one can cite the former, wouldn't the listing be more informative if publication details of the pop culture item itself were supplied as well? -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I will not object to adding primary source as well, but personally I wouldn't bother. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Compare, for example, Death Note at Donald Trump in popular culture. Warning, the DT article has some scary stuff. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Shocking stuff indeed, Gråbergs Gråa Sång. Not least the revelation that "Trump has an article on the online encyclopedia Wikipedia." (Well I never!) -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I may have to disagree here too, that does seem the least shocking item to me ;-) Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Problem with visual editor[edit] When I edit wikitables using Visual Editor, the tools doesn't work, I'm trying to edit a text within the table but whenever I tap the wikitable, it goes lock. Can anyone help me? Anyone? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 05:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Could you tell us which table in which article you're trying to edit? The most common cause that I can think of is that the table's cells are created with templates instead of the usual table syntax, but I have to see the table itself to know. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:46, 22 November 2021 (UTC) In filmography table. After seeing this problem, I've tried to edit in other device, but still not working. Maybe only mobile user can experience this problem. The Visual editor was okay before, it works well, but it is not working now. It's not a template, it's wikitable, could you please help me, I can't edit using visual editor—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 12:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) The question you were asked was "which table in which article"? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Blp articles, or almost all articles that has wikitable. I'm using VE until now because of referencing. But using VE to edit wikitables, doesn't work when using a mobile. The VE is working properly before—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 13:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Please provide the specific name of one article where you are having this issue. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 05:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty: Try to look my sandbox, there is a draft article with a table there. I can't link specific article, because I'm having this problem in all articles that has a table, my example is my sandbox—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: I had no problem editing the wikitable on user:Ctrlwiki/sandbox with VisualEditor with my Windows 10 PC and Google Chrome. What hardware/software are you using? Are you using the Wikipedia app? Or are you using browser on your phone (in mobile view or desktop view)? What do you mean "it goes lock"? Could you please provide a screenshot of that situation? GoingBatty (talk) 15:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How can I remove a website from spam or black list?[edit] Hello I created a page in the sandbox and requested it to be reviewed. For this post, I used various sources, including a site, which I later found out it was blocked. Is it possible for me to request and remove the site from spam or blacklist? How? Also, is there a way to edit my written draft? AlexJan24 (talk) 06:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) hi AlexJan24! your draft is located at Draft:Bitumen penetration testing, feel free to input that in the search bar (including the Draft: prefix) to get to your draft. as for the blacklisted site, what source are you trying to use? theremay be a reason over at WP:RSP as to why it's blacklisted. if you want to add a whitelist for a page in there, you can hop over to MediaWiki talk:Spam-whitelist and request there to whitelist it for your article (but don't forget to read WP:Reliable sources first!). happy editing!  melecie  t - 06:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) thank you @Melecie! :) I want to use this URL: {infinitygalaxy.org/bitumen-penetration-test/} I am pretty sure that it has a good and reliable information. AlexJan24 (talk) 08:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @AlexJan24 This is a commercial website, and content like that is often placed on them to help promote their business and public perception. Can you not find something more academic and less dependent of one particular company? How about https://www.academia.edu/37842763/Penetration_Test_on_Bituminous_Materials ? Nick Moyes (talk) 10:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Nick Moyes, thank you for your suggestion! :) actually, the page you mentioned is good, but does not have the content I want. Moreover it is paid content not free. I am a petrochemical engineer. In fact, I have decided to write about such tests, which are very important and useful in the industry. As compared to other sites, I find this one to have more complete content. AlexJan24 (talk) 13:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page[edit] Hi guys I'm still feeling a bit lost. I have some factually updated text I would like to add to the BDR Thermea page. I have made my identity and intentions clear and being open, honest and upfront. There is no marketing-speak in the text. Please advise how I can place this new text. TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass: As said before, you should file an edit request on the talk page at Talk:BDR Thermea by following the instructions listed at {{Request edit}}. Even though you think the text is neutral, it may not be by Wikipedia's strict standards, so it'd still be better for more experienced editors to take a second look at it before it goes into the article. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 10:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass The best approach is to find the worst-offending sentences. For each one, create a new line and state: For [insert incorrect sentence here] please replace with ['insert better-worded sentence here] [add the url to a reliable source]. Then move on to the next issue and do the same. I fear you may have dumped a huge rewrite request on the talk page which I, for one, would not want to have to deal with. "Slowly slowly catchee monkey" as, I believe, they say. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Nick Moyes Thought I was making things easier for the editors! :) No harm intended. This is my thinking: Removed outdated text, updated facts and figures, and added a par on their new strategic focus. The company has undergone has lot of change since the original text was created. Have endeavoured to keep it short, sharp and factual and externally validated where I can. Still incorrect? I am no coder and find it really hard to navigate around Wikipedia. Sorry to be a bother but any help really appreciated.TracyMelass (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Verify my article and undelete it[edit]  Itswajidshaikh00 (talk) 11:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft_talk:Wajid_shaikh I see a draft whose text is "Hey team, i just created a page of living person autobiography with reliable sources and references citations kindly give me a hope to verifiy my new article". What I don't see is a biography of any kind. As for autobiographies, you're at the wrong website. -- Hoary (talk) 11:27, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have since been indefinitely blocked. You must succeed in appealing your block to have your account reinstated. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) FTR: Wikipedia:Sockpuppet investigations/Iwajidshaikh. --bonadea contributions talk 21:44, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Draft and article titles salted. Mjroots (talk) 11:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) "Can you plz help"[edit]  Priyanka9868 (talk) 11:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I HAVE TRIED SEVERAL TIME PUBLISHING CONTENT ON WIKIPEDIA BUT IT IS SHOWING PROMOTION CAN YOU PLZ HELP No need for capitals, Priyanka9868. Which article(s) or draft(s) are you asking about? -- Hoary (talk) 11:29, 22 November 2021 (UTC) This is the page Draft:Kapil Gupta — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868 (talk • contribs) 12:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Priyanka9868 Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about someone and their accomplishments. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about a person, showing how they meet the special Wikipedia definition of a notable person. Most of the sources in the draft seem to be interviews with the person, or simple biographical descriptions, not in depth, significant coverage of the person. Please see Your First Article. 331dot (talk) 12:14, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I quote the deleted draft: The company comes under IT Software ,Data Analytics , AI and IOT industries. At the very outset, OMLogic is not an marketing outsourcing company, but a strategic partner for your online marketing success. They offer a holistic “one-stop-shopping” solution for the internet marketing needs of clients. Within that, what does "strategic" add to "partner", what does "holistic" add to "one-stop-shopping", and why the "your" in "your online marketing success"? And Priyanka9868, you say that you have tried to publish this; but you have not. Or anyway "Priyanka9868" has not. Are you saying that you, Alex2321 and Sattu.pandey are all the same person? -- Hoary (talk) 12:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Also, are you related to Priyanka9868146? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) User:Alex2321 created the logo for CHES Special Risk that Priyanka9868146 used in Draft:CHES Special Risk. David notMD (talk) 15:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) No, we are not a same person. Actually he is one of my linkedin friend. I was not able to upload the logo of CHES Special Risk that why I have asked him to do so. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868146 (talk • contribs) 05:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Sandbox[edit] Hello is it possible to create an article if the first one you did has not yet been reviewed? how can I write on the sandbox if it only brings the draft I had done previously?Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Faith Buyaki, it is possible. Just create and use a new sandbox. You can do this by for example clicking on User:Faith Buyaki/sandbox 2 and using that. A different name is possible; just be sure that the name starts User:Faith Buyaki/. -- Hoary (talk) 13:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Biology[edit] Biologyassignments write briefly holozoic nutrition, parasitic nutrition, feeding mechanism in holozoic organisms. 105.112.176.163 (talk) 14:53, 22 November 2021 (UTC) We're not doing your coursework for you, and nor will the reference desks. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Holozoic nutrition exists as an under-referenced, Stub article. David notMD (talk) 15:40, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Help moving my draft[edit] Hi, I have created a draft, Draft:Angel Heredia, that I think is ready for review. Angel Heredia is already a Wikipedia page, so could someone with the needed rights move the draft to Draft:Angel Heredia (soccer) before I submit it for review? Thank you in advance! 73.162.91.15 (talk) 16:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you submit your draft for review and it is accepted, the reviewer will place it at the proper title. You may wish to leave a note on the draft talk page explaining the titling issue, though. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I went ahead and moved the draft (per Wikipedia:Naming conventions (sportspeople)#Association football (soccer)) to make it easier on the reviewer. DanCherek (talk) 16:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Paw partol[edit] Can someone help with gross of paw patrol the movie as acorrding to box office mojo it at $130M[1] 92.236.253.249 (talk) 17:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt11832046/  Courtesy link: PAW_Patrol:_The_Movie RudolfRed (talk) 18:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC)  Done by Clpo13. GoingBatty (talk) 05:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reaching a consensus[edit] Hello, after many failures, I have explained why my edits should be accepted. Please share your opinion on these pages: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock Centrereded (talk) 17:41, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Centrereded. Your edits create the impression that your goal on Wikipedia is to make Marcelo Claure and Hans Georg Näder look bad. Cullen328 (talk) 18:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded: Reaching a consensus on an article talk page is much more difficult if the text that's proposed is long and consists of many sections. It is very unlikely that you will get a consensus in favour of what essentially amounts to "please restore all my edits", especially since the text you proposed to add is not quite neutral in tone. You received some very good advice and explanations of how the process works here; please take some time to read that and start a discussion about which specific points you think should be added to the article. Well-sourced criticism of individuals and companies can certainly be included in Wikipedia articles, but it has to be added in a neutral manner, and considering what is due weight. --bonadea contributions talk 20:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I also have no interest in the topics, but did see many comments that proposed refernces were not considered Wikipedia reliable source, and a general sense of 'piling on' rather than neutral point of view and appropriate length. You have been hammering at these articles since at least July, with for example, an attack-toned draft Draft:Hans Georg Näder. Why this deep and persistent interest in a draft and an article about German and Bolivian businessmen, respectively? David notMD (talk) 21:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 19:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @ACtiling, List of people from Merseyside? It's not locked or anything, you can edit it. Only add people that has a WP-article, preferably with a reference that supports that they belong on that page, see WP:TUTORIAL on how to add references. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:13, 22 November 2021 (UTC) WP:ADVENTURE can also be useful as an intro to Wikipedia. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You are on the verge of being blocked from making any edits to List of people from Merseyside. At the Administrators' Incidents board: "This is a newish editor, who is solely focussed on making changes to one article - List of people from Merseyside. They probably mean well. However, I have never before come across an editor who is so unable to listen to advice on basic editing skills - for example, they appear to believe that it's only possible to add a name to the list while removing one at the same time. They have been repeatedly advised, and occasionally warned, by several editors on numerous occasions, and directed to places like WP:Teahouse, but appear to be completely unable to comprehend what makes an edit allowable, and seem unwilling to learn. I would far prefer that they were not blocked but rather improve their skills - but sheer inability to achieve a modicum of competence appears to be an unresolvable problem. Any advice?" At issue, SPECIFICALLY, is that you are removing existing names for no valid reason, then inserting new names, but not consistent with the alphabetical order of the list. Stop removing names. Being a person from the past is not a valid reason to remove a name. Do not remove names. Stop removing names. REALLY. Or be blocked from ever editing this article again. David notMD (talk) 21:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Why i cant see my name on wikipedia??[edit] I have acted in a Bollywood movie as an lead actress, why i cant see myself on Wikipedia’s page 43.248.70.167 (talk) 22:07, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you meet the Wikipedia definition of a notable actress, you might merit an article, but it is strongly advised that you not attempt to write one yourself, see autobiography policy. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps[edit] Arbitrary merge to another page. Argonne was one of the only 13 founding corps of Drum Corps International in 1972. An editor (with no drum corps background) arbitrarily merged this page into a defunt D & B page. Argonne should hold it's own page because of it's historical significance. Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Argonne73. Please stop edit warring: that is regarded as disruptive, and may get you blocked. We get that you believe that there should be a separate article about Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps; but several experienced editors have disagreed with you, and nobody (including you) has argued for its retention at WP:Articles for deletion/Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps. Wikipedia works by consensus: if you think a change should be made (or not be made) it is up to you to persuade other editors according to Wikipedia's policies. A core policy is notability: it is not enough for a subject to be "of historical significance" (or popular, important, famous, influential or several other characteristics which would contribute to notability out in the world): in Wikipedia we use the word in a special sense, which mostly comes down to "are there enough reliably published sources, wholly independent of the subject, and containing significant coverage of the subject, to base an article on?" Several editors have expressed their opinion that the existing article does not establish this. If you want the article retained it is up to you to persuade other editors that there are adequate sources to establish (which means, finding such sources) that it meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. --ColinFine (talk) 22:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) pokemon showdown[edit] how do i find pokemon showdown ifo here DMPenguin (talk) 00:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) DMPenguin (talk) there is one sentence about Pokémon Showdown in the "Fan community" section of the Pokémon article. If you are able to find good published references about Pokémon Showdown you can expand the article's coverage on that topic. Karenthewriter (talk) 00:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi DMPenguin! there's also a small section on rules used by smogon, the community(?) that hosts pokémon showdown over at Pokémon_competitive_play#Smogon if you want to check that or help over there. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:56, 23 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath[edit] Hi there - can someone help me with my inline citations / footnotes? I am putting up my first wiki page submission and have feedback to improve this area - but unsure what else i need to do to meet criteria. Feedback on my new page appreciated: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath Claire Leaf (talk) 03:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Three points. First, an index number ("<ref> ... </ref>") comes immediately after a comma, period, etc; not before it. Secondly, you can (and most drafts should) reuse references: ("<ref name="XYZ">full details</ref>" for the first instance, "<ref name="XYZ" />" for each subsequent instance, where "XYZ" is something distinctive). Thirdly, for any reference, you format a link something like this Author, "[https://www.example.com/blah.blahblah/blah.html Title of the web page]", Website, date. Retrieved date. -- Hoary (talk) 03:14, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Claire Leaf. Please read Referencing for beginners. There are many techniques for creating useful references. What they all have in common is that uninformative bare URLs are not displayed, but instead text based references are displayed, which include all of the relevant bibliographic details of the reference. Things like title, author, publication or publisher, date of publication, page numbers, ISBN numbers for books, and the like. Cullen328 (talk) 03:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I fixed some of the references, but in doing so, discovered that the draft as submitted is a close paraphrasing of reference #2: https://leafie.org/seizurerescuebreath/. Reword, so that the text is in your own word rather than sentences verbatim. As for the refs I did not fix, the above link shows how to convert URLs to valid refs. There remains one other problem that may b insurmountable. Wikipedia requires that for health articles, refs meet criteria described at WP:MEDRS. The refs you have do not appear to be sufficient, i.e., not review articles of multiple clinical trials. David notMD (talk) 03:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ?[edit]  Ayaelmelegy (talk) 04:06, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Ayaelmelegy, I took a quick look at the first of these. It has 13 references, but there's no indication of which of the 13 is a reference for which part of the draft. Additionally, each of the 13 is just a "bare URL". Please see the section immediately above for how to improve the references. -- Hoary (talk) 04:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Second one, drafts also URLs. David notMD (talk) 05:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) A Request to add Template to talk page[edit] As a new Wikipedia user, I always wondered how to add Template like example NoACEMM to a User talk. Moreno Ardan1 (talk) 3:18, 23 November 2021 FYI?– Removed duplicate signature As the message on your talk page suggests, you can just add {{NoACEMM}} to your own talk page. Templates usually belong to the top of talk pages. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:25, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is Imslp a good source to back up my information?[edit] Ok so I want to edit Dolores Paterno because it says there that the original lyrics were in Spanish and translated by Levi Celerio which is not true because the original sheet music from 1880 already had Tagalog lyrics and Levi Celerio added another version of lyrics.(since the original song was published before Levi was born) I don't know other sources but the sheet music in Imslp.com that explains this. Isangtaosamundo (talk) 08:28, 23 November 2021 (UTC) In your place, I'd (i) add {{Dubious|date=November 2021}} immediately after the sentence The lyrics were translated from Spanish into Tagalog by the Filipino National Artist Levi Celerio; and (ii) raise the matter on Talk:Dolores Paterno. In the latter, give your reasons for saying that it's not true. I'm unfamiliar with imslp.com; in its current state, I have to say that it looks like mere junk. Can you perhaps retrieve an earlier, reliable version from the Wayback Machine? If so, give the title and URL of the relevant page. Feel free to cite other reliable sources (books, journals) even if they haven't been reproduced on the web and aren't downloadable. -- Hoary (talk) 10:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism[edit] Hi, I wanted to know the precise difference between blatant and subtle vandalism. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:34, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! basically subtle vandalism is vandalism where there is an attempt to make it seem real or otherwise hide it from others, for example changing a date to "21 April" which may seem real until further inspection instead of something obviously fake such as "420 January" such as the case with blatant vandalism. other such cases are, from the page linked, are adding plausible misinformation to articles (such as minor alteration of facts or additions of plausible-sounding hoaxes), hiding vandalism (such as by making two bad edits and reverting only one), simultaneously using multiple accounts or IP addresses to vandalize, abuse of maintenance and deletion templates, or reverting legitimate edits with the intent of hindering the improvement of pages. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a bunch @Melecie. But still I want some help. Can you tell me what type of vandalism the two edits are in page Warfaze, which I reverted moments back. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) it may be one of those edits that fall in between, like if you understand bengali it would probably be visible that it's an attempt at vandalism, while if you don't it could be understood as an attempt to add something constructively to a page.  melecie  t - 10:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Yeah so the language matters. Any way that you @Melecie. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Archives vanished[edit] I went to my own Talk to archive discussions, only to see that my previously created archives have vanished. Any idea what happened? David notMD (talk) 11:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Nevermind. Tracked it down to a self-inflicted deletion of "Talk header"" months ago. David notMD (talk) 11:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Heading correction[edit] How do i correct a spelling on the heading? i added an unwanted letter on the heading and need to remove it . How do i do it.  11:19, 23 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by ChabbieCee (talk • contribs) ChabbieCee, you edit a regular heading (such as "Heading correction" for this thread) just as you edit other text. As for the titles of articles or other pages, you need to "move" a page to its new title. So if you realize that the name you want for Ms Nerwande is Elisabeth (with an "s"), you view the page User:ChabbieCee/Elizabeth Nerwande, click on the option to move it, specify User:ChabbieCee/Elisabeth Nerwande, give your reason for the move, and say (i) yes you want to move any talk page there may be (if there's no talk page, no matter), and (ii) yes there should be a redirect from the old name to the new one. -- Hoary (talk) 11:42, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search?[edit] I created a draft about a dance collective called FlucT Draft:FlucT. When I do a search for "fluct" on Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?search=fluct&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go&ns0=1, the draft doesn't show up. This concerns me because I fear someone else may start an article on FlucT not realizing there is already a draft. Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen To search for a draft, you must put "Draft:" in front of the draft title. Keep in mind that users are not under any obligation to first search for a draft if they want to directly create an article. I have added the submission template to your draft so you can submit it. 331dot (talk) 11:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) 331dot thanks, I probably understood that. I just wonder if it's a good policy, because some editors may not know they have to put draft: in front, miss my draft, create their own draft, then there seems to be a duplication of effort that feels needless? Greg Dahlen (talk) 13:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Greg Dahlen, and welcome to the Teahouse. You can always open a discussion on this sort of issue at the Village pump. But in my view there are good reasons for the way it is. The Wikipedia that the public sees is six million encyclopaedia articles: nothing else. That's all that is indexed by external search engines, and that's all that the Wikipedia search box gives you unless you tell it otherwise. All the rest - talk pages, drafts, user pages, projects pages, policies, essays, etc, are "under the bonnet", seen only by those who choose to look inside. --ColinFine (talk) 13:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Greg Dahlen: There is actually a clever feature which makes it unlikely anyone would accidentally start a second draft with exactly the same name as one that already exists. If you go through all the steps to begin a new article called "FlucT" by typing that in the search box, choosing the option to "Search for pages containing FlucT" and then clicking on the red link in the search output page where it says "You may create the page "FlucT", but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered." you'll find that the newly created page will have a big banner at the top saying "There is a draft for this article at Draft:FlucT." You can confirm this by clicking on the redlink I placed in this answer, which cuts out all the searching and will now go straight into draft creation mode when clicked. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:18, 24 November 2021 (UTC) how do i seen how many edits i have[edit] how do i see how many edits i have thanks DMPenguin (talk) 13:05, 23 November 2021 (UTC) By clicking this link. -- Hoary (talk) 13:23, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DMPenguin. Just in case you're wondering where the link that Hoary mentioned above can be found, just go to your user page in in the left-hand sidebar click on "User contributions" in the "Tools" section. Then, scroll all the way down to the very bottom of the page and click on "Edit count". That's where you'll find the aforementioned link. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:30, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I go to the little toolbar (Talk, Sandbox, Preferences, Beta, Watchlist, Contributions, Log out) that's to the left of my username, which is above any Wikipedia article I'm viewing when logged in. I click on Preferences and my number of edits is shown. That's what I see on an aging Mac laptop, when using Safari as a browser, but you may see something different on your computer. Karenthewriter (talk) 17:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) English[edit] What is a tea house? 41.114.234.36 (talk) 13:32, 23 November 2021 (UTC) On Wikipedia it is a friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia. Theroadislong (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Science[edit] How do you make a tealeaf 41.190.245.5 (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. This is intended to be a friendly place for getting help in using and editing Wikipedia: for general knowledge questions, the reference desk is a better place; or often, you can look at one of our six million articles, such as tea processing. --ColinFine (talk) 14:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Bold, Italics, or Quotes?[edit] I'm writing my first ever article from scratch, albeit I've written essays for practically empty existing articles many times before, so I know what I'm doing. One thing I'm never sure about however, is when to use bold, italics and "quotations." Although I know that "quotations" are used on songs. I'm at one of those situations now, while writing about some early appearances of a former footballer turned rapper. I'm mentioning and referencing a few of the Youtube channel's he appeared on, but as they don't have Wikipedia articles like SB.TV, Mixtape Madness, Link Up TV and GRM Daily do, I'm wondering whether I should put the channel names in bold, italics or "quotations"? Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Can I have an answer please? Danstarr69 (talk) 21:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Sorry you didn't get a reply until now. I guess all our volunteers were busy! We have a 'Manual of Style' which should help you (see WP:MOS), or visit WP:BOLD; WP:ITALICS and WP:QUOTATIONS for detailed guidance. Avoid using bold in articles anywhere except the first sentence to highlight the subject, and possible later on the first use of another term that is synonymous with the page title. Bold should definitely not be used to highlight YouTueb channel names or anything else. Use italics sparingly, for things like scientific names, and use quotation marks only when you actually quote something a person genuinely said (quote it verbatim), followed by a citation to prove that they said it in that exact form. Don't make quotations very large chunks of text, and don't insert song lyrics which will probably be copyright and be instantly removed. Does that answer you now? Nick Moyes (talk) 22:53, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I'm not sure. I've just had a quick look at the articles and the Style Manual seems to help a bit. However the Be Bold article you linked doesn't seem to mention anything about when to use Bold text. And the Italics and "Quotations" articles don't look much use either, especially as the "quotations" thing isn't what I was talking about. When you mention a song, you put the song title in quotation marks like this "Song". Basically what I'm saying is... Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a website/Youtube channel which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a film/TV show which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a music mixtape/EP/LP/album which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention relevant business which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention an award ceremony and its categories which don't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a person who doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Etc etc. Here's an example paragraph, with some of the things mentioned: John Smith collaborated with Jim Smith on the song "Wikipedia is Great." The music video for "Wikipedia is Great" was released on the Youtube channel Wikipedia TV. He then released his album titled Wikipedia: Greatest Hits which won a Wikipedia Award for Best Album. The Wikipedia Awards were broadcast on BBC One. Danstarr69 (talk) 23:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Very recently I learned about MOS:TITLEABSENTBOLD and would recommend not worrying too much about the infinite rules. I'll admit I don't have an ironclad rule for italics/quotations, but whatever decision you go with, consistency within the same article is key. Sometimes certain topics have their own writing guidelines/styles tied to a specific region/grammar set. Generally bold text guidelines are defined in MOS:BOLD, not to be confused with the philosophy of WP:BOLD EDITING. Someone else will help you if need be. Thank you for the question and happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Shushugah Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Text formatting#Italic type From reading the Italics bit in the above link, it basically looks like I should use Italics whenever I want to emphasise something in the middle of a sentence, unless it's a song of course, as I already know that those are highlighted with "quotation marks." Danstarr69 (talk) 00:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Indeed! A fourth scenario that wasn't mentioned. Whether a tangentially related Article exists or doesn't exist, has no impact on whether it should be boldened/italicized or quoted. You may decide depending on its usefulness make a WP:BLUELINK for existing articles, and a WP:REDLINK for non existing articles that have strong potential to become one. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 00:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Visual Editing[edit] Hi, can anybody out here tell me how I can visually edit a table, as in this page. I could figure out how I can add a new row below a specific row, but could not figure out how to change the sl. no of all the following rows, after adding a new row. I could now answer the edit request on that talk page, not only because I could not do it, but because the edit request had not provided relevant details. Anyway, can anyone please tell me the procedure of doing it. For example, consider the following. I want to add a new row after 7th row. And add new details. So what is the procedure, using visual editing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible It's a two step process, involving both Visual Editor and Source Editor. I have copied the source code from the article into my Sandbox as it's too risky playing around with tables directly - and especially as this is just a demo. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 (Note that my edit summary links to the source page where the authors are credited - do this even in your sandbox please, as we need to credit other people's work when we upload it, as it isn't really ours to claim as our own) You'll see I have added my very own, well-known and highly-popular YouTube Channel to a newly inserted row at position 8. You should do that bit most easily in Visual Editor by Selecting Row 7, clicking the Chevron button that appears on the far left of the table and selecting Insert below. Now type in all the information/data that you can, obviously numbering this as Row 8. Ignore the fact that text is not aligned, you'll fix that in the next step. Now save your edits (Publish Changes) then go back in, but via Edit Source so that you're editing the wikimarkup.Do not use VE. Find the row with the newly added data. (Tip: use Ctrl-F to search for my surname, so you're taken straight there.) Find the line containing the position number '8' that you added. It will look likethis: |8 Copy and paste the style command from an existing centred cell and paste it in so it looks like this: | style="text-align:center" |8 Preview it to check it's centred, and repeat elsewhere as necessary. For flags and so forth, find an exisiting row contining what you need and paste that in to the empty cell (also within Source Editor, not in VE) Finally, you will now have to manually edit every subsequent row so that the row number shifts up one to accommodate the newly-inserted row. (You cannot do this automatically as you might using Excel.) It should take you just a few minutes to fix this. I stopped at fixing this at row 20, which is why there are two rows numbered 20 in my demo. Again, don't use VE for this step. Please visit this Help page to appreciate what you can do in Visual Editor and all its limitations. You can't, for example, change colours with VE - you must use source editor. The 1st line of that section I linked to mentions a 'Phabricator' list of tasks to improve VE. Follow it to appreciate what can and can't yet be done. See https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T108245 Whilst you might be frustrated that you can't do everything in Visual Editor, just remember that this tool was devised to make basic editing simpler and more WYSIWYG for beginners. Experienced editors generally tend to avoid Visual Editor and prefer using Source Editor. You are now asking about very complex editing, where either only Source Editor or a combination of both editing tools will be necessary. I hope this all makes sense. Please ping me know when you've done with the stuff in my Sandbox, and I'll then delete the content from it. Nick Moyes (talk) 16:49, 23 November 2021 (UTC) PS: Another little tip for you: Enter as much data as you can in VE. If you can't add what you want, leave some placeholder text like aaaa bbbb ccccc etc in its place. This make it much, much easier to find the right cell to edit late in Source Editor/wikimarkup. Cheers, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:54, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I really don't have words to thank you man. You just helped me beyond imagination. I really did not imagine, you would use your precious time in writing so much for me. I read this page. But could not find any help. But see, you gave me the the necessary page, which has the right information. But I could not find it myself - so foolish. I just sometimes tend to wonder, how some Wikipedians, know about every help page in Wikipedia, and have explored every nook and corner of Wikipedia. They know the exact help pages, for the exact problem, and they know which help page has that needed information. For example see, the page that I was looking into, and the page that you gave me. Such a difference. I thought I might get help from the Visual Editor help page, but you gave me the actual page which has the information that I need, the Help:Table page, under the VE section. Although both the pages may seem to have the same kind of information, but it is a huge difference. And see you also left me a PS: and gave me your great tip. Yes, in that way, it is really easy to find out. Thank you again for helping me learn Wikipedia, and with all the elder Wikipedians' kind help, I am learning so fast. Thanks again. Have a nice Wikipedia career. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes But I cannot figure out one thing, while writing the name of the channel I wrote Itcouldbepossible, but wikipedia is thinking it to be a page, and in the preview section, I see that it is writing like [1], which it thinks to be a link, for further reference you can see that in your sandbox. While yours is not looking like mine. Can you figure out and tell me what is wrong with me. I am always getting confused. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:03, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible The only think "wrong with you" is your wonderful fascination in some of the minutae of Wikipedia. Nerdiness is an asset here, as is a desire to ask questions and to learn. I only hope you then put what you're learning into practice. That's why I was willing to spend time answering someone's technical questions (even though I'm no expert on tables at all - or indeed much else, if I think about it!) The best way to learn from one's errors is first to accept that one must have made a mistake, and then to keep analysing the problem until you suddenly go ahah! that's my mistake. You never forget those types of mistakes, and that's how we learn through life. Although not normally encouraged, I give you permission to go into that section of my sandbox and make an edit there to show me the problem you're encountering. I'm not 100% sure what you're seeing. My link was actually a wikilink to the Teahouse, modified to display my name. (In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity, but might not on yours. A red link is to a page that doesn't exist, whether it's an article page, a user page or something else. The link you've just pasted above was to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/En.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible If you had put it as an external link (using one square bracket), it would look like this: [2] Both would not work becaue you accidentally repeated the en.wikipedia.org elements. You actually needed https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible as an external link, though that would not be appropriate for a table. This also works: Itcouldbepossible - I forced the User: bit to not display by putting a vertical pipe character at the end. Now I think you asked somewhere else about how we learn all this stuff. Watching, reading, doing and making mistakes. It's taken me 10 years of editing to pick up the stuff I'm now happy to share with you, but I was quite able to do most of the basic editing (apart from tables - they're really scary!) after quite a short time. I worry a bit that you're wanting to "run before you can walk", but I hope I've now managed to answer all your various questions. Good luck! Nick Moyes (talk) 11:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes, you are answering all my questions to my content. And you were saying about putting into use what I am learning. Yes, I am doing that. For example when I copied the table from your sandbox to my new tables sandbox, I wrote from whom I have copied the table. What I am wanting to say is that for example I want a wiki link to my talk page, which would show up like "Itcouldbepossible", using the vertical pipe (|) character. Then why cannot I do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very simple. [[User talk:Itcouldbepossible|Itcouldbepossible]] renders as Itcouldbepossible. For help on wikilinks, see Help:Wikilinks. --David Biddulph (talk) 12:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks, that was what I was wanting to do from the beginning. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible If you edit the source to this thread and look at my reply above, you should see exactly how I did it. The alternative is still to use the vertical pipe after your username, but to add different text (either your own name without the User: bit) or as I did when linking you to Albert Einstein! You'll work it out. Nick Moyes (talk) 12:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thank you, I wanted to tell you this from the very beginning. But you could not understand it, anyway, thank you for all the other help that you provided. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Also I want to know how I can turn by wiki redirects to green as you said here - In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:26, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Is it possible to mask external links to read the way I want. I mean Wiki links can be renamed as the editor wishes, is there any way in which external links can be masked, or is it at all possible? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating a page ethically[edit] Creating a page for my boss My boss is adamant that she wants a Wikipedia account (she's a prominent science communication researcher). I think she probably deserves one, but I'm also deeply aware that I'm biased as a prospective page author. Does anyone have any advice for me? I want to make my boss happy, but not by violating Wikipedia guidelines. Lorikie (talk) 14:26, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: You'll need to read and abide by Wikipedia:Conflict of interest. DuncanHill (talk) 14:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lorikie, and welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for being up-front about your situation. Unfortunately, there are some formidable obstacles in the way of you being able to satisfy your boss. As Duncan says, you need to read up about conflict of interest, and further, you need to make the formal declarations that you are a paid editor (it doesn't matter if you are specifically paid to do this, from what you say it is part of your job). Next, you need to drop the idea of "deserving a page", because that assumes that a Wikipedia article is in any way for the benefit of its subject. Of course many people (and other entities) do get some benefit frrom there being a Wikipedia article about them, but that is incidental: Wikipedia has no such purpose, and indeed is indifferent as to whether the subject wants an article about them or does not want an article about them. An article about your boss will not belong to her, will not be under her control, will not necessarily say what she wants it to say, and should be based almost entirely on what people wholly unconnected with her have chosen to publish about her (good or bad!) and not on what she or her associates say or want to say. You might like to show her an article about yourself isn't necessarily a good thing. The counterpart of "deserve" that Wikipedia actually uses is, "does the subject meet Wikipedia's criteria for notability? This is not directly related to prominence, importance, influence, popularity, or any of the other things that you might normally connect with "notability": in essence it is a question of whether there are enough reliably published sources, wholly unconnected with the subject to base an article on. If you and she decide that you still want there to be an article, there are more hurdles. Creating a new article is much more difficult than it looks - I liken it to building a house as your first building project, or playing a public recital after your first violin lesson, and always advise new editors to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" and how Wikipedia works. Editors who do not heed this advice often have a frustrating time as they put in a lot of work and don't understand why their house keeps falling down. Having a conflict of interest you will likely find it even harder, as you will need to basically forget everything you know about your boss, and summarise only what those independent commentators have published. If you decide to go ahead, you need to read your first article, and then use the articles for creation process to create a draft. --ColinFine (talk) 14:57, 23 November 2021 (UTC) If pressed to proceed by your boss, see if there are three or more published articles about her - content at length, not just a name-mention - and then use guidance at Help:Referencing for beginners to create references in proper ref format in your Sandbox. If you cannot find publications about her, then the effort is futile. David notMD (talk) 15:52, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: Is your boss by any chance Laura Lindenfield? If so, I think that you will have a very difficult time finding the sources you'll need for a draft article on a living person in which each and every statement has to have a reliable reference. When I Google her name, I get a number of sources but they are virtually all based on interviews (or are on websites clearly linked to her), so are not WP:INDEPENDENT. The nearest I can find that might be OK is this one at science.org which probably reaches the WP:SIGCOV for notability (specifically in her case WP:NACADEMIC) but still seems, by using language like "She is passionate about...", to take a tone that Wikipedia would not use (see WP:NPOV). Your best bet, I think, is to draft a very short article using such independent sources and then not be too disappointed if the Draft is declined: that will at least prove you have tried! Make sure you start by complying with the mandatory disclosures described at WP:PAID. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Text Allignment[edit] Any idea on text alignment in table. I want to center align some text in tables, using visual editor. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:44, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible I think you'd probably need to use wikisource code for that, using the "text-align:center; parameter. PS: I've tweaked the demo warning you placed on your sandbox page as you'd left the nowiki commands in which stop it from working. So the warning now looks like it's come from me, but obviously isn't a real vandalism warning. The best way to leave warnings is to enable WP:TWINKLE in your Preferences. Then it does it automatically for you via menu options, plus a whole lot more. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thanks for the edit. I know it is not a real vandalism warning. It is just my sandbox. If I had done something wrong, then you would have told me in the talk page. But anyway to get to the point, I have already TWINKLE enabled. I used it to start delete discussions, and got myself blocked for being thought to be a sockpuppet, since that page was created by another sock, and the sock with whom the checkusers thought me to be linked had edit warred with the previous sock. Anyway thats not the point. What you are saying is that it will give me warnings. Can you specify what warning, or what type of warnings??? Also it would be really kind of you, if you could tell me in a more precise way of how to use wikisource code, suddenly while I am writing in normal language. For example I am using "text-align:center" here, but nothing is happening. Please tell me the way, to center text in a table while using visual or source editor. Thanks for the answer, and regards. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible As I replied to you on my sandbox, it's important that you are editing tables and complex entries in WP:Source Editor not Visual Editor. Did you follow my instructions on how to switch between them, and did it work? You will get nowhere with anything other than the simplest of tables if you stick to VE. The parameter I mentioned above is wiki markup - as written with Source Editor. So, go to the table I put in my sandbox for you at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 Click 'Edit Source' next to the heading to open the section in Source Editor. (Tell me if that function is not showing, as it means you've not forced it to display via your personal Preferences setting. My default is for it to offer me both editing tools all the time - it should be yours, too, especially if you're working on tables.) Search for the word 'center' and you'll see 101 examples - one controlling each cell of data. Regarding WP:TWINKLE: Go to your own userpage. Use the drop down menu box marked 'TW' to access the Twinkle menu. The first sub-item is WARN. This opens a menu box for you to explore the various options. Try leaving yourself a first level warning against vandalism, then a second, and then a third. I can't explain all the options here for you - we expect editors to very carefully' learn for themselves how to use these powerful tools (which can easily upset other users). So read the TWINKLE page and the accompanying Documentation to understand what it can do. But it covers most of the common issues of edit waring, content removal, addition of uncited content, harassment, conflict of interest, spamming, plus single issue notices like encouragement to use edit summaries, biting newcomers, etc etc. There is a complete list of warning templates (here). Nick Moyes (talk) 10:33, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes the edit source function is showing. Also I thought that you were telling me of editing error warnings, so I asked what type of warnings. I had pasted that warning in my sandbox just to see how it looks. I knew how to use twinkle. For the table related thing, I want to know where should I place "text-align:center; parameter? I have made my edit on your sandbox. You can see that, and tell me if it is right or wrong. You will see that the table I created, it has some errors. For the channel name column I thought of adding my talk page and then renaming the wiki link as "Itcouldbepossible". But it showed up like this: ([3]) - why??? While your wiki link it redirects it to the teahouse it shows Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel? How come??? Why cannot I edit my wiki link to show my username, while on clicking it redirects to my talk page. For example yours show Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel and it redirects to WP:TH Why is mine not like that?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 11:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Tables[edit] Today I was editing random articles, when I came across Nach Baliye. I was reading the article, trying to find for any errors, when I came across this table [4]. I just sort of went mad seeing this table. Just a well formatted and advanced table, with all the color schemes, and just nice cell merging. Can anyone, for heaven's sake tell me how that table was created with all those attractive features. I don't really think that the Wiki markup was typed out. There must be some modern graphical interface, for doing such a tedious thing. I want to know how that table was created. I would really be glad, if I get the answer from someone who is an expert in this matter, and has been editing Wikipedia for a couple of years, because, I want the exact and precise method of creating such a table. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:58, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I've been editing for over 10 years and wouldn't dare to create such a thing. I have, however, created very long data tables by starting in Excel, getting all the sorting, the text and the wikilinks and in the right places before exporting it with a tool to Wikimarkup. But I'm not aware of a tool to make tables look pretty like that - so I shall await for answers from other users more experienced in such things, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: It takes work, often over time with improvements by different editors, often starting with copying the format from another page. The first similar table in the article was added by an IP here with edit summary "added table like other shows Jhalak". That may refer to Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart or an earlier season. It could maybe be tracked further back but I haven't tried. Help:Table has general help but it's complicated. Much of it is the same or similar as HTML tables which some editors already know. PrimeHunter (talk) 16:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @PrimeHunter Yes, but how did that specific table appear in Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart. How was it created??? And also I wanted to know one thing, how on Earth did you find that specific page history, when the table was added?? I have seen many people doing so. Is their anyway of finding out when a specific edit was first made, and the what edits followed?? I really don't think that you flicked through the page history. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible There are various ways to find when an edit was first made. The slow way is to look at 500 edits in View History at a time. Let's assume that covers the entire history (if not, just increase the number to 5000 in the url bar), then you can find a rough midway point, click (and note down) the date you clicked. Is the edit showing there? IF yes, go down and divide the lower half of edits into half again, and select another date to click. Is the edit there? If 'No', then it will have been made between those two date points. Divide the edits roughly in half again and then again until you find the first one where that edit was made. Doing this in conjunction with looking at View History (green numbers are positive count of bytes added/red are negative overall additions) makes this just a few minutes work. It took me just a few moments to do that for Nach Baliye, speeded up by using Ctrl-F to search for 'Scoring Chart', of which there were 823 mentions in the edit summaries. I went to the lowest one, then scrolled down a dozen or so edits further and found a massive addition by an IP on 9 March 2019 with a very helpful edit summary. Job done. Of course, that's the slow way. For simplest way to find when a short text string was first added to an article is to copy it, then go to the View History tab. Just above all the row entries, click Find addition/removal to use the 'WikiBlame' tool. Be aware that by default it only searches 500 of the latest edits before the date selected. So it will miss the first addition of text if it's a very heavily edited page as this one is unless you spend time to understand how to take advantage of the tool's searching features. I wouldn't use it to search for a chart being added, but I might focus on just one unique element or keyword in that chart. Hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks, I learnt a new thing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 10:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the answer. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Prime Healthcare[edit] My interest in CAlifornia health systems drew me to Prime Healthcare, where I was struck by the difference in how Wiki editors handle the material. Whereas large systems such as Sutter and Kaiser are given the opportunity to list history, background, hospital names, etc, Prime's editing history is aggressive and heavy handed. The result is a page listing controversy and nothing else. Prime owns 45 hospitals nationwide, employs 50000 people, but you wouldn't know it by Wiki. BTW I am in no way affiliated or compensated by Prime; my research is for a graduate program. I'm just amazed at the discrepancy and poor treatment. I haven't researched it enough to determine whether sources should be improved on deleted materials, but that is different than what edit history shows. Any attempts to improve the page are immediately deleted wholesale, in apparent violation of Wiki editing rules. (I attempted to undo some edits myself) Can anyone explain this? Prime owner Prem Reddy has made a number of enemies with his handling of labor, etc. Is that at play here? Archie515 (talk) 16:46, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Prime Healthcare Services Karenthewriter (talk) 17:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Archie515. Welcome to the Teahouse! You can discuss the issue about the content of the article on the article's talk page. The concerned editors might engage in the conversation and help you in finding a possible solution. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 17:24, 23 November 2021 (UTC) thanks but page monitors refuse to allow access and have not responded to talk page requests in the past. Now locked out from making any changes to sources. Page is an embarrassment to all Wiki contributors. Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC)Archie515Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The Controversy section is well supported by reliable published sources. It's Prime Healthcare that should be embarrassed. Maproom (talk) 23:04, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Archie515: I see you posted twice at Talk:Prime Healthcare Services. The last piece of advice you were given there was to make a specific request. I suggest you think about the worst problem with the article, and then post a specific detailed suggestion on the talk page, such as: Please change the current article text "_____________" to "_____________" based on the independent reliable source found at ___________________. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Disambiguation-links tag on redirects[edit] In this edit I intentionally changed a redirect from targeting an article to targeting a disambiguation page. To my surprise, the "adding disambiguation links" tag was added. In a way, it makes sense (I added a link to a disambiguation page), but on the other hand, the tag is probably meant for when someone adds a link in an article without knowing it's a disambiguation page, like if I added a link to Georgia or Mercury in an article. Can something be changed so that this tagging isn't activated when the end result of the edit is a redirect? I reported this at WP:EF/FP but was sent here for a reason I don't understand: the responding editor said both that the tag isn't activated and that it's working properly. 72.77.45.188 (talk) 17:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The edit filter (which interdicts edits) is separate from the tagging system (which describes what an edit is). —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 17:38, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Do anyone think like that?[edit] Are there people actually thinking that this page represents a universal and unbiased point of view? Owerthise (talk) 18:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I think like that. It doesn't seem biased to me. What direction do you think it's biased in? Maproom (talk) 18:43, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think there is such a thing as an universal point of view, certainly not about a topic connected to religion. It looks neutral to me; it may not be perfect (no article is) but there are no obvious problems. --bonadea contributions talk 19:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Owerthise: Welcome to the Teahouse! If you have a specific suggestion to improve the article, please post it on Talk:Muhammad with a reliable source and the {{edit extended-protected}} template, and another editor will review your request. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Help with revision[edit] Hello! I'm trying to revise the first two paragraphs of the Cultural context section of Cueva de las Manos and I need help with it. I've already put in a copy edit request for the whole page with the Guild of Copyeditors, but I was wondering if there was a group/person willing to help with this particular section in the meantime. I'm trying to revise the section in accordance with the following advice of FunkMonk in the talk page: There is some repetition in how you describe the paintings were returned to and were influential for the people throughout many thousands of years, perhaps check if someone of it can be consolidated or made less similar. If anyone would be willing to lend a hand in this respect it would be much appreciated. If there is a better place to ask for such help, I would be grateful if someone could point me there. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Best, Tyrone Madera (talk) 18:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) This might be better for the Talk Page, but one possible way to consolidate this might be to write this instead, which combines two separate statements: However, that so many people contributed to the artwork for thousands of years suggests the cave held great significance for the artists, with earlier groups influencing later ones through a continuous narrative, playing out over millennia. But that's just one possibility. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 18:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing this Ayaelmelegy (talk) 22:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Ayaelmelegy, and welcome to the Teahouse. I'm afraid there is quite a lot you need to do before that draft is publishable. The things that caught my attention are: Remove all the links to interviews. There are restrictions on the use of External links in articles, and in any case Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. Format all the references so that a reviewer can readily evaluate which of them are likely to be most reliable and independent. See REFB, and WP:NONENG. With you anonymous URLs it is hard to see whether your draft establishes that she meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. Remove all the evaluative language. No article should ever describe anything in Wikipedia's voice as "one of the most important" or "much needed". I get that you strongly approve of Hamdy's work, but none of that must come out in the article: it must be a neutral summary of what the independent sources say about her - and if there is criticism, then you should probably summarise that too. (You can quote a source that described something as "important" or "much needed" but you need to make sure that it is a source which is wholly unconnected with the subject). Please also see WP:NOTSOAPBOX. --ColinFine (talk) 23:12, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I did some edits would you please check them? Thank you — Preceding unsigned comment added by Ayaelmelegy (talk • contribs) 00:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) new wikipedia page[edit]  2600:1700:9C80:62E0:89ED:2A1E:FE48:ACD3 (talk) 22:08, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome. If you want to create a new article(not a page), that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content. If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Unregistered users(as well as new accounts) cannot directly create new articles. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) What do you do on this page[edit]  Jenay Ava (talk) 22:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Jenay Ava Welcome to the Teahouse. What we do is welcome new users and assist them with any problems they may encounter whilst editing Wikipedia. We recognise that it can be a steep learning curve to begin with, so we try to make that journey a little smoother for you in the hope that you will stick around and become one of our many regular contributors. Unfortunately, looking at your very first few contributions, I fear you think Wikipedia talk pages might be like a chat forum. They are not, and all we do here is help build the worlds greatest online encyclopaedia, and use the talk pages to assist us in that task. You'd be most welcome to help with this undertaking (6.2 million+ article in English so far), but this place is not a social media chat site. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:40, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Help writing a page[edit] I have the page written and now need to post to wikipedia, I have akk the references. Please help, FletcherEmma (talk) 23:37, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @FletcherEmma welcome to Tea House!. If you want to create a new article, that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content.If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. I have been editing the errors on Draft:Gehad Hamdy for while. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing? Thank you. Ayaelmelegy (talk) 00:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, some things need to be improved: (1) the article must have a lead portion (the introduction should not have a heading), (2) there should not be no links or Arabic letters in section headings, (3) there is too much text in the infobox, and Arabic text isn't needed there. There are other things, but you can start with this. Regards. — Alalch Emis (talk) 00:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) STATUS: Draft nominated for Speedy deletion and creating editor blocked as suspected sock (denies). David notMD (talk) 01:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have overhauled (Major Cleanup) the article (This specifically). Jairus is doing... ?? 02:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ayaelmelegy: Draft:Gehad Hamdy has no references in the "Biography" and "Speak Up" sections. Please add more independent reliable sources to your draft before submitting for AfC. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 06:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) GoingBatty, "Ayaelmelegy" got an indefinite block six hours before your last (and of course well-intentioned) message. -- Hoary (talk) 12:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Ongoing Events Section[edit] What happened with the ongoing events section on both the desktop website and the mobile website? It used to be a nicely categorized, bulleted set of news. But not it's just hyperlinks to specific wikipedia pages. I would use the previous style daily, it was a wonderful source for news. I wonder if there is a good reason for removing it, or if it was potentially even an oversight. Regardless I loved that feature and don't want to lose it :( 47.229.202.202 (talk) 01:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Are you confusing Portal:Current events/Sidebar and Portal:Current events? Both are linked from "In the news" on Main Page, on "Ongoing" and "Other recent events". PrimeHunter (talk) 02:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Rv tags[edit] Hello. Is it possible to remove tags? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Possibly - which tags were you considering removing, and why? GoingBatty (talk) 06:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty, no, I've no reason, I've seen some users who edit without any tags. So I asked. Can the tags be removed without any reason? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: When tags are removed from an article, it's assumed that the problems they highlight have been resolved. If an editor feels that a tag was removed prematurely, they'll add it back at their own discretion. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Tenryuu, I didn't tell about the tags of article. I told about editing tags such as "2017 wikitext editor". Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 07:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: There is a difference between Wikipedia:Tags and Wikipedia:Templates I see you removed the {{under construction}} template from the Carlos Moguel Jr. article in this edit, but you cannot remove the tag "2017 wikitext editor" from the edit. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 07:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Those are not removable. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reftoolbar[edit] How to change the date format for Reftoolbar? from Dmy to mdy. Thanks. —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Welcome to the Teahouse! It appears that there is a discussion about this at Wikipedia talk:RefToolbar#Date formats. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) User level[edit] Hi, I wanted to know how I can add a user level. I mean there will be a bar on my user page, and it will fill up as I edit articles. And beside it would be written, my next user level. Any idea on how to do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Here's a workaround, Itcouldbepossible. Just edit articles, constructively. Soon you will be "extended confirmed". Most people are, and few people will be surprised or much interested to know that you are. There are some other very minor superpowers that you can acquire; but again, few people will be interested. Some superpowers are a bit out of the ordinary, and you might want to advertise one or other of these; on the other hand, advertising them may seem somewhat vulgar. Best is to aim to be an article-improving Clark Kent. -- Hoary (talk) 11:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible Welcome to Tea House! As @Itcouldbepossible stated, it's rarely of interest to anyone else. This essay on WP:HATCOLLECTING could be useful on the mostly harms/some benefits of gamifying your user page with statistics. I do indulge myself with Wikipedia:Service awards as a way of marking specific tiers of editing. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 12:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Dead Links[edit] I see that many pages have something called 'dead links'. What are these so called 'dead links', and how can I make them alive again?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) For information about dead links, read WP:Dead links. --David Biddulph (talk) 09:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks again for the answer Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Add (journalist) to title[edit] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anshuman_Tiwari Can you write this in brackets as journalist because it is journalist? You can write Journalist in back of their name in brackets. Coolblack4 (talk) 10:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Coolblack4, and welcome to the Teahouse. We use a term in parenthesis like that in an article title only when it is necessary to distinguish between different people (or other subjects) with the same name. See WP:Disambiguation. --ColinFine (talk) 11:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Something drastic certainly should be done to this article. Sample: In digital journalism, he has created and successfully established an innovative and exclusive multilingual digital first content vertical moneybhaskar.com for Danik Bhaskar Group, DB Corp. It is the largest Hindi business portal and offers guidance, utility and wisdom based jargon free economic-business and investment content to aspiring readers in Hindi. (For one thing, I wonder what is being excluded.) -- Hoary (talk) 12:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Distracting AFC submission templates[edit] Does anyone know how to collapse or get the "this topic is not notable" AFC submission templates out of the way? I'm trying to work on a draft article, and they're distracting and take up about half of the page. wizzito | say hello! 12:43, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Those templates were put there for the benefit of reviewers, and of anyone who might want to work on improving the draft. You should not remove or collapse them. That's why they all say "Do not remove this line!" Maproom (talk) 13:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thing is, they are INCREDIBLY distracting to look at, I at least want to move them to the bottom at the page if I can't collapse or make them invisible. I just can't have them taking up 90% of the page from the top, it bothers me a lot and prevents me from working. wizzito | say hello! 13:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Reality shifting has been Declined three times and Rejected twice. I have restored the Declined and Rejection and Comments to the top of the article, where those belong. David notMD (talk) 14:23, 24 November 2021 (UTC) If you believe you can rescue this with better references, do so, but be aware that Rejected drafts are likely to be deleted and 'salted.' Make sure you have an off-Wikipedia copy. And understand that 'salted' means that an Administrator's approval would be needed to try again to create a draft on this topic. David notMD (talk) 14:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there seriously no way to get these to the bottom of the page (where they are still visible) or make them look less distracting? Your comments aren't helping me, sorry. Also, I am still working on the article; I had to rewrite it from scratch because the original user who created the draft made it look very bad and had bad formatting and grammar. (Also, they kept resubmitting it multiple times despite not addressing the concerns, I haven't submitted it yet.) It isn't anything speedy deletable (see Wikipedia:Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity), there's a Washington Post report and a scholarly article on the subject, but probably just needs to be worked on and more RS might need to be made before it gets published. wizzito | say hello! 14:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Declines and Rejections are considered a required part of draft history, so that the next reviewer can check if the weaknesses identified by previous reviewers have been addressed. Given that you have taken over a draft created and edited by other editors, you can leave a Comment to that effect with the other Comments. David notMD (talk) 14:39, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there no way to at least move it to a part of the page where it's visible by people contributing and reviewers, but not as distracting as a glob that takes up the first part of the page? If not, I may just have to move it to my userspace and work on it from there. wizzito | say hello! 14:42, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David notMD noting for the record I have reverted you; @Wizzito offers up a convincing reason why they moved them down, because it was distracting for them, and as long as they move them back up before resubmitting I see no issue with that move. That is ignoring the question whether or not these templates are relevant at all considering the rewrite currently ongoing, although it appears that at least some of the original text still exists. -- Asartea Talk | Contribs 15:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have added a Comment that you are in the process of completely revising the draft. Do as much as you can before submitting. I know nothing about the topic, but will mention that as it stand now, the lead is over-referenced. Pick at most three refs to support the Lead. Those refs and the others may be used in the body of the article, as more detail on history, reception, criticism, etc. is added. David notMD (talk) 14:47, 24 November 2021 (UTC) That's because I was working on it, putting the references in so I can use them later, and then delete the ref in the lead when I've finished reviewing the source and using it to source statements. You act like a draft should have the same standards as mainspace, and besides, I moved it to userspace anyways so I can work on it. wizzito | say hello! 14:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You didn't move it, you copied & pasted the content, so please read about copying within Wikipedia. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I want to pitch in from an outside editor. 5 declined templates, 2 separate comments, and 1 draft template? I know if I was unaware of all Wikipedia policies, this would feel very WP:BITEy to me. Is there not a better solution, in the form of an {{articlehistory}} style template? I understand why the need for all the notices (for future reviewers to know at a glance), but there can be so many better ways to do this now. --JackFromWisconsin (talk | contribs) 14:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I feel like a lot of people in this thread are being BITEy too... wizzito | say hello! 15:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My intention was to proffer advice on how to create a draft that is more likely to be accepted. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I understand, but I feel as if my questions weren't answered and were just met with a "don't do this" or "don't do that" and reverts. wizzito | say hello! 15:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Tendentious editing[edit] This is not marked as an essay. This is also not marked with the green symbol for policy, guidelines pages. So, how important are these types of guideline pages? Knight Skywalker (talk) 12:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very important. It's a supplementary explantion to the guideline WP:DE, and carries the same status. Mjroots (talk) 13:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Mjroots: If this is very important, then why Wikipedia is not including the green symbol in the box? --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I didn't use the bold format, but still the above lines are showing as in bold to me. --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You used the bold format by putting a semi-colon before the colon at the start of the line. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I've fixed the bold. Mjroots (talk) 16:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) This page is not one of Wikipedia's policies or guidelines, as it has not been thoroughly vetted by the community. Also it has category. Wikipedia essays (?) (±) Knight Skywalker (talk) 17:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Markup[edit] Is there any introduction page, or help page, or user guide page for Wikipedia Markup. If there is then please provide me. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Itcouldbepossible, you may be looking for Help:Wikitext. DanCherek (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks for the Wiki Help page, I am surely going to read it. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Page[edit] As you see now, my talk page has become a little clumsy. What is the way to make it clean? Should I archive them or is there any other option? Seeking for options. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: While you're allowed to delete conversations from your own talk page, archiving is recommended because it makes it more convenient for you and other editors to find those old conversations in the future. There are a few different ways to archive a talk page – you can do it manually or have a bot help you – and there is more information about each of those at Help:Archiving a talk page. DanCherek (talk) 14:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek I have archived the archival messages left by a bot on my talk page and have shifted them here. But I cannot move the three notification to three different headings, it is coming under a single heading. Please can you help me in that respect. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The first section starts with {| so you need to end it with |}. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Newcomers[edit] How, can I find all newcomers on Wikipedia??? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:08, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: You can find them at Special:Log/newusers but for what purpose ? 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA (talk) 15:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) IP blocking for 31 hours[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… I hope you don’t mind me asking this question: When administrators impose a block on IP addresses for the first time, the length of the block is usually 31 hours (1 day, 7 hours). Do you have any idea why administrators chose this value? Thanks. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 15:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC). It's so that they don't just wait 24 and return to the same things. 31h is also a standard length in the blocking dropdown menu and has been since before I was an admin. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Imagine a kid messing around in study hall, causing a school's IP to be blocked. A 24-hour block would allow him or her to come back the next day during the same period to cause more trouble. Deor (talk) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Amkgp is Sock editing[edit] Hi, first I was blocked on the ground of thinking to be a sockpuppet, and the sockpuppet investigation was raised by an ipv6 ip 2402:3A80:6E1:9A2E:A110:65A0:5AD7:4F15. The sock investigation page is here. In the Clerk, CheckUser, and/or patrolling admin comments section Blablubbs commented and said The filer is obviously Amkgp loutsocking. I blocked them for a bit. Then after the block expired then again another comment was added by ipv6 user 2402:3A80:1A4E:9197:C5B8:CED1:C0FD:9A1D, and then blablubbs blocked the ipv6 again. When it was proved that I am not a sockpuppet, this ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:A17E:9C61:AA1F:59E2:32A2 came and added welcomed me. Till date, I could not understand anything, why an ipv6 was coming an leaving me messages on my talk page. Today again an ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA came and gave me a vandalism warning on an edit that I made two articles namely, Piet van der Sluijs and Dré Saris, where I had only added a more reference needted tag using twinkle. It was my mistake or not is a far matter, but then he leaves me another link to learn wikipedia in under an hour link. He also answers one of my questions in the teahouse. The thing is all these ipv6 start with 2402:3A80, and blablubbs has stated previously that it is block evasion of sock amkgp. Now what is to be done? Should I raise a sockpuppet investigation request?? Would it be possible to block just huge range ipv6s? Please give me suggestion in this matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 16:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Also in there sockpuppet investigation page [[5]] we can see that the suspected sock puppets ipv6 also starts with 2402:3A80. We can also see that he got blocked because he used to edit logged out for a couple of time, and he was blocked for that reason. And also in a further section we see that he also used or uses 2409:4061::/36 this ipv6 range. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Itcouldbepossible (talk • contribs) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Article Not Published - not adequate sources[edit] Hi, I am trying to publish an article about a triceratops skull nicknamed 'Dragon King' which was sold last year which is the biggest skull ever found, but the article was rejected due to a lack of sources. The sale was private so there wasn't a lot of press generated, but what there was is referenced. The skull is definitely the biggest in the world. How would I go about validating that? Would an image of the skull with dimensions count? What could I use to validate it. Any suggestions would be very welcome. I should make clear that I have no financial stake in this at all, it is simply a fact that the skull is the biggest found and I think should be public information. Maudjohnson90 (talk) 16:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Maudjohnson90 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Wikipedia articles summarize what publicly available independent reliable sources say about a topic. If a topic is not sufficiently covered in such sources, it cannot be on Wikipedia. Documents in private hands or otherwise not available to the public cannot be used as sources here. Did no sources cover this sale, or its discovery? If some did, but not enough for a standalone article, there may be an existing article this could be mentioned in. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Shouldn't you first put any reliable information at Triceratops#Size, Maudjohnson90? That's a pretty well-watched article and if you think that particular skull needs another full article, you could discuss that on the Talk Page at Talk:Triceratops Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:59, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks Mike Turnbull! I have added information under Triceratops#Skull and that has remained since I added it. I'll discuss on the Talk Page as suggested. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Maudjohnson90 (talk • contribs) 17:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Final Publish[edit] Hello Sir, how much time does it take for the draft to get finally published ? Thank you. Johnalphanso (talk) 17:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You have not created nor submitted a draft to Articles for Creation. Is there a particular draft you are interested in? — Preceding unsigned comment added by David notMD (talk • contribs) 18:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Johnalphanso, and welcome to the Teahouse. There is no simple answer to your quewstion: a draft takes as long to be published as it takes. There is no queue, no schedule, no deadline: all editors are volunteers, and work on what they choose when they choose. If you're talking about Draft:Sanskar Desai, that will not get reviewed until it is submitted for review (add {{subst:AFC/draft}} to the top). But it will not get accepted until somebody follows Theroadislong's advice in the comment and removes all the unreliable sources from the list. It will likely not get accepted until somebody reformats the references from a useless list of URLs to a meaningful set of citations - see CITE. There are probably other things that need improving too: in particular, the question of whether it has been worked on by a paid editor. --ColinFine (talk) 18:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How do I contribute images?[edit]  Bettertoseeit (talk) 19:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Bettertoseeit Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please review WP:UPIMAGE carefully. It's not as easy to do as it may appear. You must be autoconfirmed(account is four days old with 10 edits or more) to upload images yourself, but you can visit Files for upload to get assistance with doing so if not autoconfirmed. 331dot (talk) 19:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating Book Pages[edit] Hello. One of the reasons I became an editor was an interest in filling some of the gaps in bibliographies I am familiar with. What I'm unsure about is if an author has a large bibliography with Wiki articles already created for most of their books (for example; Stephen Baxter bibliography), am I safe in assuming I can create pages for those novels which do not have an article, or might the lack of an article be for a reason? Thanks in advance. John Bullock (talk) 20:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Such novels still have to be independently notable. Ruslik_Zero 20:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Jbullock83 Welcome to Tea House! In general, a notable author does not mean their books are automatically notable and vice versa, see WP:NOTINHERIT, however in the book specific Wikipedia:Notability (books) guidelines, it does mention certain famous authors' books are likely to be automatically notable. Anything by Jane G. Austin for example, but another editor may disagree. Looking at specific notability criteria for the books themselves would be the most forward process. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 20:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the info/reply! Ruslik, Shushugah. John Bullock (talk) 21:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) ASIAN MONTH[edit] i would like to ask if my translated ( not fully complete article counts for the ediathon asian month in order to get a postcard Georgekagian (talk) 21:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian Welcome to Tea House! Your question is better asked on Wikipedia talk:Wikipedia Asian Month/2021 but if you add {{WAM talk 2021}} to the talk page of said article, a WikiProject judge will determine its eligibility for you. I doubt a full translation is needed, since each article can be independently edited anyways. It needs to comply with English Wikipedia WP:5 Principles whereas it may differ in other languages. Thank you for the question and happy editing! Good luck with the edit-a-thon! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 21:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian, looking at here, it looks like it counts unless it was a pure machine translation (e.g. Google Translate) that you didn't copy edit to correct any errors. {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 21:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1057009594" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 21:50 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH ???, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 Autoconfirmed user 2 Template:Uw-create-kept 3 Audio sample 4 How to create Article page for Musical Artist 5 section formatting 6 Citing Manga 7 Problem with visual editor 8 How can I remove a website from spam or black list? 9 Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page 10 Verify my article and undelete it 11 "Can you plz help" 12 Sandbox 13 Biology 14 Help moving my draft 15 Paw partol 16 Reaching a consensus 17 I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page 18 Why i cant see my name on wikipedia?? 19 Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps 20 pokemon showdown 21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath 22 I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ? 23 A Request to add Template to talk page 24 Is Imslp a good source to back up my information? 25 Vandalism 26 My Talk Archives vanished 27 Heading correction 28 Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search? 29 how do i seen how many edits i have 30 English 31 Science 32 Bold, Italics, or Quotes? 33 Visual Editing 34 Creating a page ethically 35 Text Allignment 36 Wiki Tables 37 Prime Healthcare 38 Disambiguation-links tag on redirects 39 Do anyone think like that? 40 Help with revision 41 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 42 new wikipedia page 43 What do you do on this page 44 Help writing a page 45 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 46 Ongoing Events Section 47 Rv tags 48 Reftoolbar 49 User level 50 Dead Links 51 Add (journalist) to title 52 Distracting AFC submission templates 53 Wikipedia:Tendentious editing 54 Wikipedia Markup 55 My Talk Page 56 Newcomers 57 IP blocking for 31 hours 58 Amkgp is Sock editing 59 Article Not Published - not adequate sources 60 Final Publish 61 How do I contribute images? 62 Creating Book Pages 63 ASIAN MONTH 64 What did I do wrong? Most recent archives 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131, 1132 Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yep, @Patrick Vedel you should just close that and/or any other notes you might have and proceed to edit said article. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The sentences 2 - 5 are there in case they don't know about them. Faster than Thunder (talk) 06:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: & @Nick Moyes: thank you for guidance. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 07:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) How to create Article page for Musical Artist[edit]  Jasonseah69 (talk) 23:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69 Welcome to the Teahouse, and thank you for asking. Creating a Wikipedia article from scratch is the hardest task for anyone to achieve here - especially for a newcomer. Trying to write one about yourself is fraught with problems and issues, and will be seen as WP:PROMOTION. See our Conflict of Interest and AUTOBIOGRAPHY advice, too. But most of all, see WP:NMUSIC - this is a shortcut link to our essential Notability criteria for musicians. If you cannot find multiple, independent, in-depth sources that have written about you in detail (ignore your own PR output), and you don't meet any of the music notability criteria, then I'm afraid there's no chance. But if you feel you do meet those criteria, it's still best to leave it to someone who wants to write about you - not try to do it yourself. That person should then gain experience in editing here for some time, and then read This Guide on creating an article and submitting it for review through our Articles for Creation process, before it goes through our final 'New Page Review' process and is allowed to remain in the encyclopaedia. That's a brief outline of the process. Please do not attempt to use your Wikipedia WP:USERPAGE to write about yourself, or it will be deleted. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Good advice above. NB take "someone who wants to write about you" to mean "someone who, unprompted, wants to write about you". Not somebody asked (let alone paid) to do so. -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69: Welcome to the teahouse. You can create an article, or just submit using a draft for the Articles for Creation. However, if there aren't any sources, if may be deleted, so take your own risks for creating an article, or for less risks, create a draft. To create one, go to Wikipedia:Draft. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Severestorm28, please be aware that Jasonseah69 has only made three edits, is not autoconfirmed, and therefore cannot create an article directly. Also, their user page has been deleted as G11 - unambiguous advertising or promotion. Cullen328 (talk) 01:26, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cullen328: Next time-if someone is not autoconfirmed, and advertising, I'm giving them a warning. Thanks for the reminder. Severestorm28 (talk) 14:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) section formatting[edit] I had a draft reviewed and the reviewer suggested I use "==Section Formatting==". I cannot find any information on ==Section Formatting== on any of the help pages. Can someone send me a link which explains what ==Section Formatting== is and how to implement it? I appreciate the review and suggestions. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Looking at your draft, it's divided into headings using bold text titles, which isn't how articles are typically ordered here. If you replace the bold formatting on your section titles with two equals signs on either side, it'll create a more traditional section header for each title, which also then forces the page to create a table of contents and allows easier navigation. ??????? ? 00:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Thank You. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:47, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage COURTESY: Draft:Peebles Homestead You fixed that, but there are other problems. Several descriptive paragraphs have no references. Much of the content about his military service is general history, i.e., not about him (nor is it about the house). Hence, not relevant. David notMD (talk) 02:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) your draft has great promise. The section on the homestead today used one reference source three times, so I reformatted the citations so that the references are combined. You did a good job of finding references, can any of your sources be used for paragraphs that have no references? If not, where did you find the data about the house dimensions and construction details? If it was from a published source (such as a history book or local newspaper article) those can be used as a reference. Unfortunately, if it was from an unpublished source (such as handwritten notes found at a historical society) that would be considered original research and can't be used as a reference. You'll need to do some more work on your draft, but I'm sure it can be improved enough to be accepted. Keep up the good work. Karenthewriter (talk) 09:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Ownership gap between 1838 and 1994. David notMD (talk) 10:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Karenthewriter, Thanks for combining my multiple citations; I couldn't figure that out! The dimensions for the house (and other observations) came from me. I measured the house to see if the dimensions matched the 1798 Tax records, but I'm sure I can find them in other sources, especially the State Museum Survey. Also, I think the few sentences about Peebles' military record are relevant, because his military service adds credibility to the comment that the property could be eligible for the National Register. Without a notable person, places like Monticello and Montpelier would just be old brick houses. I could insert his military service elsewhere. Thoughts? Granted, Peebles service and the Cumberland County Militia could be separate articles which I can't do right now. I will clean up my citations. SharedHeritage (talk) 01:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @SharedHeritage: To answer your original question, see MOS:SECTIONS. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 05:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) I'm glad I could help with your multiple citations. I've been an editor since 2007 and I just recently mastered that skill. There's a lot to learn. As David notMD stated the information about Peebles military service isn't about the homestead you're writing about, so a reviewer might feel its unnecessary. (I'm not a reviewer, so I am no expert on that subject.) You mention Peebles received two different land grants. Did he receive any of his land due to his military service? If so you could state that, which would tie in the homestead with him being in the military. I live in northwest Pennsylvania, and some of the area's earliest settlers apparently received land because of their Revolutionary War service, so that's why I asked about the land grants. One thing you need to be aware of is that Wikipedia does not want any original research, or writers speculating on what happened. (To quote Sergeant Friday from the old TV show Dragnet – "Just the facts, ma'am.") So I'm a bit concerned about such phrases as "it is reasonable to believe that the windows are original..." and "The two front doors were likely replaced at this time," for that reads as though you are guessing or giving an opinion. You can quote someone and say that researcher Joe Smart-Guy believes the windows are original, and give a reference citation, but don't make it sound as though it's your conclusion. Remember that you're writing an encyclopedia article for the general reading public, and not trying to convince a historical commission to add the house to the National Register. I hope I'm not overwhelming your with details, but I'm aware that writing for Wikipedia means following Wikipedia rules. Best wishes on your research and writing project. Karenthewriter (talk) 05:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Manga[edit] Hi, I'm new to Wikipedia. I am currently trying to figure out how to add a small detail to a page about Kennedy Space Center in Pop Culture. I'm wondering how I should cite the manga volumes of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure for the details I need. Should I use a pre-existing source on Wikipedia to the volumes that links to the publisher's website, or should i use the ISBN and author info as my citation? Cheese420 (talk) 04:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Author, book title, place, publisher, year, ISBN, and page number, Cheese420. And perhaps additional info besides, such as details of the original publication. -- Hoary (talk) 05:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cheese420 I'm going to disagree with @Hoary here. For a WP-pop cult section, you don't cite the manga, you cite a WP:RS that noticed that the manga had the KSC in it and bothered to write something about it, like at least some of the films are mentioned at [1]. Anything in that section without a decent secondary source should be removed. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) That would be better, yes. (But I'd rather got the impression that that was a lost cause.) If a secondary source comments on the pop culture item and one can cite the former, wouldn't the listing be more informative if publication details of the pop culture item itself were supplied as well? -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I will not object to adding primary source as well, but personally I wouldn't bother. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Compare, for example, Death Note at Donald Trump in popular culture. Warning, the DT article has some scary stuff. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Shocking stuff indeed, Gråbergs Gråa Sång. Not least the revelation that "Trump has an article on the online encyclopedia Wikipedia." (Well I never!) -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I may have to disagree here too, that does seem the least shocking item to me ;-) Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Problem with visual editor[edit] When I edit wikitables using Visual Editor, the tools doesn't work, I'm trying to edit a text within the table but whenever I tap the wikitable, it goes lock. Can anyone help me? Anyone? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 05:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Could you tell us which table in which article you're trying to edit? The most common cause that I can think of is that the table's cells are created with templates instead of the usual table syntax, but I have to see the table itself to know. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:46, 22 November 2021 (UTC) In filmography table. After seeing this problem, I've tried to edit in other device, but still not working. Maybe only mobile user can experience this problem. The Visual editor was okay before, it works well, but it is not working now. It's not a template, it's wikitable, could you please help me, I can't edit using visual editor—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 12:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) The question you were asked was "which table in which article"? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Blp articles, or almost all articles that has wikitable. I'm using VE until now because of referencing. But using VE to edit wikitables, doesn't work when using a mobile. The VE is working properly before—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 13:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Please provide the specific name of one article where you are having this issue. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 05:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty: Try to look my sandbox, there is a draft article with a table there. I can't link specific article, because I'm having this problem in all articles that has a table, my example is my sandbox—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: I had no problem editing the wikitable on user:Ctrlwiki/sandbox with VisualEditor with my Windows 10 PC and Google Chrome. What hardware/software are you using? Are you using the Wikipedia app? Or are you using browser on your phone (in mobile view or desktop view)? What do you mean "it goes lock"? Could you please provide a screenshot of that situation? GoingBatty (talk) 15:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How can I remove a website from spam or black list?[edit] Hello I created a page in the sandbox and requested it to be reviewed. For this post, I used various sources, including a site, which I later found out it was blocked. Is it possible for me to request and remove the site from spam or blacklist? How? Also, is there a way to edit my written draft? AlexJan24 (talk) 06:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) hi AlexJan24! your draft is located at Draft:Bitumen penetration testing, feel free to input that in the search bar (including the Draft: prefix) to get to your draft. as for the blacklisted site, what source are you trying to use? theremay be a reason over at WP:RSP as to why it's blacklisted. if you want to add a whitelist for a page in there, you can hop over to MediaWiki talk:Spam-whitelist and request there to whitelist it for your article (but don't forget to read WP:Reliable sources first!). happy editing!  melecie  t - 06:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) thank you @Melecie! :) I want to use this URL: {infinitygalaxy.org/bitumen-penetration-test/} I am pretty sure that it has a good and reliable information. AlexJan24 (talk) 08:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @AlexJan24 This is a commercial website, and content like that is often placed on them to help promote their business and public perception. Can you not find something more academic and less dependent of one particular company? How about https://www.academia.edu/37842763/Penetration_Test_on_Bituminous_Materials ? Nick Moyes (talk) 10:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Nick Moyes, thank you for your suggestion! :) actually, the page you mentioned is good, but does not have the content I want. Moreover it is paid content not free. I am a petrochemical engineer. In fact, I have decided to write about such tests, which are very important and useful in the industry. As compared to other sites, I find this one to have more complete content. AlexJan24 (talk) 13:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page[edit] Hi guys I'm still feeling a bit lost. I have some factually updated text I would like to add to the BDR Thermea page. I have made my identity and intentions clear and being open, honest and upfront. There is no marketing-speak in the text. Please advise how I can place this new text. TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass: As said before, you should file an edit request on the talk page at Talk:BDR Thermea by following the instructions listed at {{Request edit}}. Even though you think the text is neutral, it may not be by Wikipedia's strict standards, so it'd still be better for more experienced editors to take a second look at it before it goes into the article. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 10:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass The best approach is to find the worst-offending sentences. For each one, create a new line and state: For [insert incorrect sentence here] please replace with ['insert better-worded sentence here] [add the url to a reliable source]. Then move on to the next issue and do the same. I fear you may have dumped a huge rewrite request on the talk page which I, for one, would not want to have to deal with. "Slowly slowly catchee monkey" as, I believe, they say. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Nick Moyes Thought I was making things easier for the editors! :) No harm intended. This is my thinking: Removed outdated text, updated facts and figures, and added a par on their new strategic focus. The company has undergone has lot of change since the original text was created. Have endeavoured to keep it short, sharp and factual and externally validated where I can. Still incorrect? I am no coder and find it really hard to navigate around Wikipedia. Sorry to be a bother but any help really appreciated.TracyMelass (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Verify my article and undelete it[edit]  Itswajidshaikh00 (talk) 11:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft_talk:Wajid_shaikh I see a draft whose text is "Hey team, i just created a page of living person autobiography with reliable sources and references citations kindly give me a hope to verifiy my new article". What I don't see is a biography of any kind. As for autobiographies, you're at the wrong website. -- Hoary (talk) 11:27, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have since been indefinitely blocked. You must succeed in appealing your block to have your account reinstated. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) FTR: Wikipedia:Sockpuppet investigations/Iwajidshaikh. --bonadea contributions talk 21:44, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Draft and article titles salted. Mjroots (talk) 11:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) "Can you plz help"[edit]  Priyanka9868 (talk) 11:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I HAVE TRIED SEVERAL TIME PUBLISHING CONTENT ON WIKIPEDIA BUT IT IS SHOWING PROMOTION CAN YOU PLZ HELP No need for capitals, Priyanka9868. Which article(s) or draft(s) are you asking about? -- Hoary (talk) 11:29, 22 November 2021 (UTC) This is the page Draft:Kapil Gupta — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868 (talk • contribs) 12:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Priyanka9868 Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about someone and their accomplishments. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about a person, showing how they meet the special Wikipedia definition of a notable person. Most of the sources in the draft seem to be interviews with the person, or simple biographical descriptions, not in depth, significant coverage of the person. Please see Your First Article. 331dot (talk) 12:14, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I quote the deleted draft: The company comes under IT Software ,Data Analytics , AI and IOT industries. At the very outset, OMLogic is not an marketing outsourcing company, but a strategic partner for your online marketing success. They offer a holistic “one-stop-shopping” solution for the internet marketing needs of clients. Within that, what does "strategic" add to "partner", what does "holistic" add to "one-stop-shopping", and why the "your" in "your online marketing success"? And Priyanka9868, you say that you have tried to publish this; but you have not. Or anyway "Priyanka9868" has not. Are you saying that you, Alex2321 and Sattu.pandey are all the same person? -- Hoary (talk) 12:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Also, are you related to Priyanka9868146? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) User:Alex2321 created the logo for CHES Special Risk that Priyanka9868146 used in Draft:CHES Special Risk. David notMD (talk) 15:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) No, we are not a same person. Actually he is one of my linkedin friend. I was not able to upload the logo of CHES Special Risk that why I have asked him to do so. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868146 (talk • contribs) 05:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Sandbox[edit] Hello is it possible to create an article if the first one you did has not yet been reviewed? how can I write on the sandbox if it only brings the draft I had done previously?Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Faith Buyaki, it is possible. Just create and use a new sandbox. You can do this by for example clicking on User:Faith Buyaki/sandbox 2 and using that. A different name is possible; just be sure that the name starts User:Faith Buyaki/. -- Hoary (talk) 13:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Biology[edit] Biologyassignments write briefly holozoic nutrition, parasitic nutrition, feeding mechanism in holozoic organisms. 105.112.176.163 (talk) 14:53, 22 November 2021 (UTC) We're not doing your coursework for you, and nor will the reference desks. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Holozoic nutrition exists as an under-referenced, Stub article. David notMD (talk) 15:40, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Help moving my draft[edit] Hi, I have created a draft, Draft:Angel Heredia, that I think is ready for review. Angel Heredia is already a Wikipedia page, so could someone with the needed rights move the draft to Draft:Angel Heredia (soccer) before I submit it for review? Thank you in advance! 73.162.91.15 (talk) 16:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you submit your draft for review and it is accepted, the reviewer will place it at the proper title. You may wish to leave a note on the draft talk page explaining the titling issue, though. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I went ahead and moved the draft (per Wikipedia:Naming conventions (sportspeople)#Association football (soccer)) to make it easier on the reviewer. DanCherek (talk) 16:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Paw partol[edit] Can someone help with gross of paw patrol the movie as acorrding to box office mojo it at $130M[1] 92.236.253.249 (talk) 17:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt11832046/  Courtesy link: PAW_Patrol:_The_Movie RudolfRed (talk) 18:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC)  Done by Clpo13. GoingBatty (talk) 05:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reaching a consensus[edit] Hello, after many failures, I have explained why my edits should be accepted. Please share your opinion on these pages: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock Centrereded (talk) 17:41, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Centrereded. Your edits create the impression that your goal on Wikipedia is to make Marcelo Claure and Hans Georg Näder look bad. Cullen328 (talk) 18:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded: Reaching a consensus on an article talk page is much more difficult if the text that's proposed is long and consists of many sections. It is very unlikely that you will get a consensus in favour of what essentially amounts to "please restore all my edits", especially since the text you proposed to add is not quite neutral in tone. You received some very good advice and explanations of how the process works here; please take some time to read that and start a discussion about which specific points you think should be added to the article. Well-sourced criticism of individuals and companies can certainly be included in Wikipedia articles, but it has to be added in a neutral manner, and considering what is due weight. --bonadea contributions talk 20:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I also have no interest in the topics, but did see many comments that proposed refernces were not considered Wikipedia reliable source, and a general sense of 'piling on' rather than neutral point of view and appropriate length. You have been hammering at these articles since at least July, with for example, an attack-toned draft Draft:Hans Georg Näder. Why this deep and persistent interest in a draft and an article about German and Bolivian businessmen, respectively? David notMD (talk) 21:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 19:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @ACtiling, List of people from Merseyside? It's not locked or anything, you can edit it. Only add people that has a WP-article, preferably with a reference that supports that they belong on that page, see WP:TUTORIAL on how to add references. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:13, 22 November 2021 (UTC) WP:ADVENTURE can also be useful as an intro to Wikipedia. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You are on the verge of being blocked from making any edits to List of people from Merseyside. At the Administrators' Incidents board: "This is a newish editor, who is solely focussed on making changes to one article - List of people from Merseyside. They probably mean well. However, I have never before come across an editor who is so unable to listen to advice on basic editing skills - for example, they appear to believe that it's only possible to add a name to the list while removing one at the same time. They have been repeatedly advised, and occasionally warned, by several editors on numerous occasions, and directed to places like WP:Teahouse, but appear to be completely unable to comprehend what makes an edit allowable, and seem unwilling to learn. I would far prefer that they were not blocked but rather improve their skills - but sheer inability to achieve a modicum of competence appears to be an unresolvable problem. Any advice?" At issue, SPECIFICALLY, is that you are removing existing names for no valid reason, then inserting new names, but not consistent with the alphabetical order of the list. Stop removing names. Being a person from the past is not a valid reason to remove a name. Do not remove names. Stop removing names. REALLY. Or be blocked from ever editing this article again. David notMD (talk) 21:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Why i cant see my name on wikipedia??[edit] I have acted in a Bollywood movie as an lead actress, why i cant see myself on Wikipedia’s page 43.248.70.167 (talk) 22:07, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you meet the Wikipedia definition of a notable actress, you might merit an article, but it is strongly advised that you not attempt to write one yourself, see autobiography policy. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps[edit] Arbitrary merge to another page. Argonne was one of the only 13 founding corps of Drum Corps International in 1972. An editor (with no drum corps background) arbitrarily merged this page into a defunt D & B page. Argonne should hold it's own page because of it's historical significance. Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Argonne73. Please stop edit warring: that is regarded as disruptive, and may get you blocked. We get that you believe that there should be a separate article about Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps; but several experienced editors have disagreed with you, and nobody (including you) has argued for its retention at WP:Articles for deletion/Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps. Wikipedia works by consensus: if you think a change should be made (or not be made) it is up to you to persuade other editors according to Wikipedia's policies. A core policy is notability: it is not enough for a subject to be "of historical significance" (or popular, important, famous, influential or several other characteristics which would contribute to notability out in the world): in Wikipedia we use the word in a special sense, which mostly comes down to "are there enough reliably published sources, wholly independent of the subject, and containing significant coverage of the subject, to base an article on?" Several editors have expressed their opinion that the existing article does not establish this. If you want the article retained it is up to you to persuade other editors that there are adequate sources to establish (which means, finding such sources) that it meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. --ColinFine (talk) 22:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) pokemon showdown[edit] how do i find pokemon showdown ifo here DMPenguin (talk) 00:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) DMPenguin (talk) there is one sentence about Pokémon Showdown in the "Fan community" section of the Pokémon article. If you are able to find good published references about Pokémon Showdown you can expand the article's coverage on that topic. Karenthewriter (talk) 00:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi DMPenguin! there's also a small section on rules used by smogon, the community(?) that hosts pokémon showdown over at Pokémon_competitive_play#Smogon if you want to check that or help over there. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:56, 23 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath[edit] Hi there - can someone help me with my inline citations / footnotes? I am putting up my first wiki page submission and have feedback to improve this area - but unsure what else i need to do to meet criteria. Feedback on my new page appreciated: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath Claire Leaf (talk) 03:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Three points. First, an index number ("<ref> ... </ref>") comes immediately after a comma, period, etc; not before it. Secondly, you can (and most drafts should) reuse references: ("<ref name="XYZ">full details</ref>" for the first instance, "<ref name="XYZ" />" for each subsequent instance, where "XYZ" is something distinctive). Thirdly, for any reference, you format a link something like this Author, "[https://www.example.com/blah.blahblah/blah.html Title of the web page]", Website, date. Retrieved date. -- Hoary (talk) 03:14, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Claire Leaf. Please read Referencing for beginners. There are many techniques for creating useful references. What they all have in common is that uninformative bare URLs are not displayed, but instead text based references are displayed, which include all of the relevant bibliographic details of the reference. Things like title, author, publication or publisher, date of publication, page numbers, ISBN numbers for books, and the like. Cullen328 (talk) 03:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I fixed some of the references, but in doing so, discovered that the draft as submitted is a close paraphrasing of reference #2: https://leafie.org/seizurerescuebreath/. Reword, so that the text is in your own word rather than sentences verbatim. As for the refs I did not fix, the above link shows how to convert URLs to valid refs. There remains one other problem that may b insurmountable. Wikipedia requires that for health articles, refs meet criteria described at WP:MEDRS. The refs you have do not appear to be sufficient, i.e., not review articles of multiple clinical trials. David notMD (talk) 03:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ?[edit]  Ayaelmelegy (talk) 04:06, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Ayaelmelegy, I took a quick look at the first of these. It has 13 references, but there's no indication of which of the 13 is a reference for which part of the draft. Additionally, each of the 13 is just a "bare URL". Please see the section immediately above for how to improve the references. -- Hoary (talk) 04:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Second one, drafts also URLs. David notMD (talk) 05:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) A Request to add Template to talk page[edit] As a new Wikipedia user, I always wondered how to add Template like example NoACEMM to a User talk. Moreno Ardan1 (talk) 3:18, 23 November 2021 FYI?– Removed duplicate signature As the message on your talk page suggests, you can just add {{NoACEMM}} to your own talk page. Templates usually belong to the top of talk pages. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:25, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is Imslp a good source to back up my information?[edit] Ok so I want to edit Dolores Paterno because it says there that the original lyrics were in Spanish and translated by Levi Celerio which is not true because the original sheet music from 1880 already had Tagalog lyrics and Levi Celerio added another version of lyrics.(since the original song was published before Levi was born) I don't know other sources but the sheet music in Imslp.com that explains this. Isangtaosamundo (talk) 08:28, 23 November 2021 (UTC) In your place, I'd (i) add {{Dubious|date=November 2021}} immediately after the sentence The lyrics were translated from Spanish into Tagalog by the Filipino National Artist Levi Celerio; and (ii) raise the matter on Talk:Dolores Paterno. In the latter, give your reasons for saying that it's not true. I'm unfamiliar with imslp.com; in its current state, I have to say that it looks like mere junk. Can you perhaps retrieve an earlier, reliable version from the Wayback Machine? If so, give the title and URL of the relevant page. Feel free to cite other reliable sources (books, journals) even if they haven't been reproduced on the web and aren't downloadable. -- Hoary (talk) 10:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism[edit] Hi, I wanted to know the precise difference between blatant and subtle vandalism. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:34, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! basically subtle vandalism is vandalism where there is an attempt to make it seem real or otherwise hide it from others, for example changing a date to "21 April" which may seem real until further inspection instead of something obviously fake such as "420 January" such as the case with blatant vandalism. other such cases are, from the page linked, are adding plausible misinformation to articles (such as minor alteration of facts or additions of plausible-sounding hoaxes), hiding vandalism (such as by making two bad edits and reverting only one), simultaneously using multiple accounts or IP addresses to vandalize, abuse of maintenance and deletion templates, or reverting legitimate edits with the intent of hindering the improvement of pages. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a bunch @Melecie. But still I want some help. Can you tell me what type of vandalism the two edits are in page Warfaze, which I reverted moments back. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) it may be one of those edits that fall in between, like if you understand bengali it would probably be visible that it's an attempt at vandalism, while if you don't it could be understood as an attempt to add something constructively to a page.  melecie  t - 10:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Yeah so the language matters. Any way that you @Melecie. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Archives vanished[edit] I went to my own Talk to archive discussions, only to see that my previously created archives have vanished. Any idea what happened? David notMD (talk) 11:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Nevermind. Tracked it down to a self-inflicted deletion of "Talk header"" months ago. David notMD (talk) 11:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Heading correction[edit] How do i correct a spelling on the heading? i added an unwanted letter on the heading and need to remove it . How do i do it.  11:19, 23 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by ChabbieCee (talk • contribs) ChabbieCee, you edit a regular heading (such as "Heading correction" for this thread) just as you edit other text. As for the titles of articles or other pages, you need to "move" a page to its new title. So if you realize that the name you want for Ms Nerwande is Elisabeth (with an "s"), you view the page User:ChabbieCee/Elizabeth Nerwande, click on the option to move it, specify User:ChabbieCee/Elisabeth Nerwande, give your reason for the move, and say (i) yes you want to move any talk page there may be (if there's no talk page, no matter), and (ii) yes there should be a redirect from the old name to the new one. -- Hoary (talk) 11:42, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search?[edit] I created a draft about a dance collective called FlucT Draft:FlucT. When I do a search for "fluct" on Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?search=fluct&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go&ns0=1, the draft doesn't show up. This concerns me because I fear someone else may start an article on FlucT not realizing there is already a draft. Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen To search for a draft, you must put "Draft:" in front of the draft title. Keep in mind that users are not under any obligation to first search for a draft if they want to directly create an article. I have added the submission template to your draft so you can submit it. 331dot (talk) 11:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) 331dot thanks, I probably understood that. I just wonder if it's a good policy, because some editors may not know they have to put draft: in front, miss my draft, create their own draft, then there seems to be a duplication of effort that feels needless? Greg Dahlen (talk) 13:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Greg Dahlen, and welcome to the Teahouse. You can always open a discussion on this sort of issue at the Village pump. But in my view there are good reasons for the way it is. The Wikipedia that the public sees is six million encyclopaedia articles: nothing else. That's all that is indexed by external search engines, and that's all that the Wikipedia search box gives you unless you tell it otherwise. All the rest - talk pages, drafts, user pages, projects pages, policies, essays, etc, are "under the bonnet", seen only by those who choose to look inside. --ColinFine (talk) 13:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Greg Dahlen: There is actually a clever feature which makes it unlikely anyone would accidentally start a second draft with exactly the same name as one that already exists. If you go through all the steps to begin a new article called "FlucT" by typing that in the search box, choosing the option to "Search for pages containing FlucT" and then clicking on the red link in the search output page where it says "You may create the page "FlucT", but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered." you'll find that the newly created page will have a big banner at the top saying "There is a draft for this article at Draft:FlucT." You can confirm this by clicking on the redlink I placed in this answer, which cuts out all the searching and will now go straight into draft creation mode when clicked. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:18, 24 November 2021 (UTC) how do i seen how many edits i have[edit] how do i see how many edits i have thanks DMPenguin (talk) 13:05, 23 November 2021 (UTC) By clicking this link. -- Hoary (talk) 13:23, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DMPenguin. Just in case you're wondering where the link that Hoary mentioned above can be found, just go to your user page in in the left-hand sidebar click on "User contributions" in the "Tools" section. Then, scroll all the way down to the very bottom of the page and click on "Edit count". That's where you'll find the aforementioned link. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:30, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I go to the little toolbar (Talk, Sandbox, Preferences, Beta, Watchlist, Contributions, Log out) that's to the left of my username, which is above any Wikipedia article I'm viewing when logged in. I click on Preferences and my number of edits is shown. That's what I see on an aging Mac laptop, when using Safari as a browser, but you may see something different on your computer. Karenthewriter (talk) 17:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) English[edit] What is a tea house? 41.114.234.36 (talk) 13:32, 23 November 2021 (UTC) On Wikipedia it is a friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia. Theroadislong (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Science[edit] How do you make a tealeaf 41.190.245.5 (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. This is intended to be a friendly place for getting help in using and editing Wikipedia: for general knowledge questions, the reference desk is a better place; or often, you can look at one of our six million articles, such as tea processing. --ColinFine (talk) 14:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Bold, Italics, or Quotes?[edit] I'm writing my first ever article from scratch, albeit I've written essays for practically empty existing articles many times before, so I know what I'm doing. One thing I'm never sure about however, is when to use bold, italics and "quotations." Although I know that "quotations" are used on songs. I'm at one of those situations now, while writing about some early appearances of a former footballer turned rapper. I'm mentioning and referencing a few of the Youtube channel's he appeared on, but as they don't have Wikipedia articles like SB.TV, Mixtape Madness, Link Up TV and GRM Daily do, I'm wondering whether I should put the channel names in bold, italics or "quotations"? Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Can I have an answer please? Danstarr69 (talk) 21:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Sorry you didn't get a reply until now. I guess all our volunteers were busy! We have a 'Manual of Style' which should help you (see WP:MOS), or visit WP:BOLD; WP:ITALICS and WP:QUOTATIONS for detailed guidance. Avoid using bold in articles anywhere except the first sentence to highlight the subject, and possible later on the first use of another term that is synonymous with the page title. Bold should definitely not be used to highlight YouTueb channel names or anything else. Use italics sparingly, for things like scientific names, and use quotation marks only when you actually quote something a person genuinely said (quote it verbatim), followed by a citation to prove that they said it in that exact form. Don't make quotations very large chunks of text, and don't insert song lyrics which will probably be copyright and be instantly removed. Does that answer you now? Nick Moyes (talk) 22:53, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I'm not sure. I've just had a quick look at the articles and the Style Manual seems to help a bit. However the Be Bold article you linked doesn't seem to mention anything about when to use Bold text. And the Italics and "Quotations" articles don't look much use either, especially as the "quotations" thing isn't what I was talking about. When you mention a song, you put the song title in quotation marks like this "Song". Basically what I'm saying is... Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a website/Youtube channel which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a film/TV show which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a music mixtape/EP/LP/album which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention relevant business which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention an award ceremony and its categories which don't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a person who doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Etc etc. Here's an example paragraph, with some of the things mentioned: John Smith collaborated with Jim Smith on the song "Wikipedia is Great." The music video for "Wikipedia is Great" was released on the Youtube channel Wikipedia TV. He then released his album titled Wikipedia: Greatest Hits which won a Wikipedia Award for Best Album. The Wikipedia Awards were broadcast on BBC One. Danstarr69 (talk) 23:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Very recently I learned about MOS:TITLEABSENTBOLD and would recommend not worrying too much about the infinite rules. I'll admit I don't have an ironclad rule for italics/quotations, but whatever decision you go with, consistency within the same article is key. Sometimes certain topics have their own writing guidelines/styles tied to a specific region/grammar set. Generally bold text guidelines are defined in MOS:BOLD, not to be confused with the philosophy of WP:BOLD EDITING. Someone else will help you if need be. Thank you for the question and happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Shushugah Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Text formatting#Italic type From reading the Italics bit in the above link, it basically looks like I should use Italics whenever I want to emphasise something in the middle of a sentence, unless it's a song of course, as I already know that those are highlighted with "quotation marks." Danstarr69 (talk) 00:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Indeed! A fourth scenario that wasn't mentioned. Whether a tangentially related Article exists or doesn't exist, has no impact on whether it should be boldened/italicized or quoted. You may decide depending on its usefulness make a WP:BLUELINK for existing articles, and a WP:REDLINK for non existing articles that have strong potential to become one. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 00:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Visual Editing[edit] Hi, can anybody out here tell me how I can visually edit a table, as in this page. I could figure out how I can add a new row below a specific row, but could not figure out how to change the sl. no of all the following rows, after adding a new row. I could now answer the edit request on that talk page, not only because I could not do it, but because the edit request had not provided relevant details. Anyway, can anyone please tell me the procedure of doing it. For example, consider the following. I want to add a new row after 7th row. And add new details. So what is the procedure, using visual editing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible It's a two step process, involving both Visual Editor and Source Editor. I have copied the source code from the article into my Sandbox as it's too risky playing around with tables directly - and especially as this is just a demo. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 (Note that my edit summary links to the source page where the authors are credited - do this even in your sandbox please, as we need to credit other people's work when we upload it, as it isn't really ours to claim as our own) You'll see I have added my very own, well-known and highly-popular YouTube Channel to a newly inserted row at position 8. You should do that bit most easily in Visual Editor by Selecting Row 7, clicking the Chevron button that appears on the far left of the table and selecting Insert below. Now type in all the information/data that you can, obviously numbering this as Row 8. Ignore the fact that text is not aligned, you'll fix that in the next step. Now save your edits (Publish Changes) then go back in, but via Edit Source so that you're editing the wikimarkup.Do not use VE. Find the row with the newly added data. (Tip: use Ctrl-F to search for my surname, so you're taken straight there.) Find the line containing the position number '8' that you added. It will look likethis: |8 Copy and paste the style command from an existing centred cell and paste it in so it looks like this: | style="text-align:center" |8 Preview it to check it's centred, and repeat elsewhere as necessary. For flags and so forth, find an exisiting row contining what you need and paste that in to the empty cell (also within Source Editor, not in VE) Finally, you will now have to manually edit every subsequent row so that the row number shifts up one to accommodate the newly-inserted row. (You cannot do this automatically as you might using Excel.) It should take you just a few minutes to fix this. I stopped at fixing this at row 20, which is why there are two rows numbered 20 in my demo. Again, don't use VE for this step. Please visit this Help page to appreciate what you can do in Visual Editor and all its limitations. You can't, for example, change colours with VE - you must use source editor. The 1st line of that section I linked to mentions a 'Phabricator' list of tasks to improve VE. Follow it to appreciate what can and can't yet be done. See https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T108245 Whilst you might be frustrated that you can't do everything in Visual Editor, just remember that this tool was devised to make basic editing simpler and more WYSIWYG for beginners. Experienced editors generally tend to avoid Visual Editor and prefer using Source Editor. You are now asking about very complex editing, where either only Source Editor or a combination of both editing tools will be necessary. I hope this all makes sense. Please ping me know when you've done with the stuff in my Sandbox, and I'll then delete the content from it. Nick Moyes (talk) 16:49, 23 November 2021 (UTC) PS: Another little tip for you: Enter as much data as you can in VE. If you can't add what you want, leave some placeholder text like aaaa bbbb ccccc etc in its place. This make it much, much easier to find the right cell to edit late in Source Editor/wikimarkup. Cheers, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:54, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I really don't have words to thank you man. You just helped me beyond imagination. I really did not imagine, you would use your precious time in writing so much for me. I read this page. But could not find any help. But see, you gave me the the necessary page, which has the right information. But I could not find it myself - so foolish. I just sometimes tend to wonder, how some Wikipedians, know about every help page in Wikipedia, and have explored every nook and corner of Wikipedia. They know the exact help pages, for the exact problem, and they know which help page has that needed information. For example see, the page that I was looking into, and the page that you gave me. Such a difference. I thought I might get help from the Visual Editor help page, but you gave me the actual page which has the information that I need, the Help:Table page, under the VE section. Although both the pages may seem to have the same kind of information, but it is a huge difference. And see you also left me a PS: and gave me your great tip. Yes, in that way, it is really easy to find out. Thank you again for helping me learn Wikipedia, and with all the elder Wikipedians' kind help, I am learning so fast. Thanks again. Have a nice Wikipedia career. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes But I cannot figure out one thing, while writing the name of the channel I wrote Itcouldbepossible, but wikipedia is thinking it to be a page, and in the preview section, I see that it is writing like [1], which it thinks to be a link, for further reference you can see that in your sandbox. While yours is not looking like mine. Can you figure out and tell me what is wrong with me. I am always getting confused. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:03, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible The only think "wrong with you" is your wonderful fascination in some of the minutae of Wikipedia. Nerdiness is an asset here, as is a desire to ask questions and to learn. I only hope you then put what you're learning into practice. That's why I was willing to spend time answering someone's technical questions (even though I'm no expert on tables at all - or indeed much else, if I think about it!) The best way to learn from one's errors is first to accept that one must have made a mistake, and then to keep analysing the problem until you suddenly go ahah! that's my mistake. You never forget those types of mistakes, and that's how we learn through life. Although not normally encouraged, I give you permission to go into that section of my sandbox and make an edit there to show me the problem you're encountering. I'm not 100% sure what you're seeing. My link was actually a wikilink to the Teahouse, modified to display my name. (In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity, but might not on yours. A red link is to a page that doesn't exist, whether it's an article page, a user page or something else. The link you've just pasted above was to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/En.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible If you had put it as an external link (using one square bracket), it would look like this: [2] Both would not work becaue you accidentally repeated the en.wikipedia.org elements. You actually needed https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible as an external link, though that would not be appropriate for a table. This also works: Itcouldbepossible - I forced the User: bit to not display by putting a vertical pipe character at the end. Now I think you asked somewhere else about how we learn all this stuff. Watching, reading, doing and making mistakes. It's taken me 10 years of editing to pick up the stuff I'm now happy to share with you, but I was quite able to do most of the basic editing (apart from tables - they're really scary!) after quite a short time. I worry a bit that you're wanting to "run before you can walk", but I hope I've now managed to answer all your various questions. Good luck! Nick Moyes (talk) 11:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes, you are answering all my questions to my content. And you were saying about putting into use what I am learning. Yes, I am doing that. For example when I copied the table from your sandbox to my new tables sandbox, I wrote from whom I have copied the table. What I am wanting to say is that for example I want a wiki link to my talk page, which would show up like "Itcouldbepossible", using the vertical pipe (|) character. Then why cannot I do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very simple. [[User talk:Itcouldbepossible|Itcouldbepossible]] renders as Itcouldbepossible. For help on wikilinks, see Help:Wikilinks. --David Biddulph (talk) 12:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks, that was what I was wanting to do from the beginning. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible If you edit the source to this thread and look at my reply above, you should see exactly how I did it. The alternative is still to use the vertical pipe after your username, but to add different text (either your own name without the User: bit) or as I did when linking you to Albert Einstein! You'll work it out. Nick Moyes (talk) 12:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thank you, I wanted to tell you this from the very beginning. But you could not understand it, anyway, thank you for all the other help that you provided. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Also I want to know how I can turn by wiki redirects to green as you said here - In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:26, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Is it possible to mask external links to read the way I want. I mean Wiki links can be renamed as the editor wishes, is there any way in which external links can be masked, or is it at all possible? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating a page ethically[edit] Creating a page for my boss My boss is adamant that she wants a Wikipedia account (she's a prominent science communication researcher). I think she probably deserves one, but I'm also deeply aware that I'm biased as a prospective page author. Does anyone have any advice for me? I want to make my boss happy, but not by violating Wikipedia guidelines. Lorikie (talk) 14:26, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: You'll need to read and abide by Wikipedia:Conflict of interest. DuncanHill (talk) 14:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lorikie, and welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for being up-front about your situation. Unfortunately, there are some formidable obstacles in the way of you being able to satisfy your boss. As Duncan says, you need to read up about conflict of interest, and further, you need to make the formal declarations that you are a paid editor (it doesn't matter if you are specifically paid to do this, from what you say it is part of your job). Next, you need to drop the idea of "deserving a page", because that assumes that a Wikipedia article is in any way for the benefit of its subject. Of course many people (and other entities) do get some benefit frrom there being a Wikipedia article about them, but that is incidental: Wikipedia has no such purpose, and indeed is indifferent as to whether the subject wants an article about them or does not want an article about them. An article about your boss will not belong to her, will not be under her control, will not necessarily say what she wants it to say, and should be based almost entirely on what people wholly unconnected with her have chosen to publish about her (good or bad!) and not on what she or her associates say or want to say. You might like to show her an article about yourself isn't necessarily a good thing. The counterpart of "deserve" that Wikipedia actually uses is, "does the subject meet Wikipedia's criteria for notability? This is not directly related to prominence, importance, influence, popularity, or any of the other things that you might normally connect with "notability": in essence it is a question of whether there are enough reliably published sources, wholly unconnected with the subject to base an article on. If you and she decide that you still want there to be an article, there are more hurdles. Creating a new article is much more difficult than it looks - I liken it to building a house as your first building project, or playing a public recital after your first violin lesson, and always advise new editors to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" and how Wikipedia works. Editors who do not heed this advice often have a frustrating time as they put in a lot of work and don't understand why their house keeps falling down. Having a conflict of interest you will likely find it even harder, as you will need to basically forget everything you know about your boss, and summarise only what those independent commentators have published. If you decide to go ahead, you need to read your first article, and then use the articles for creation process to create a draft. --ColinFine (talk) 14:57, 23 November 2021 (UTC) If pressed to proceed by your boss, see if there are three or more published articles about her - content at length, not just a name-mention - and then use guidance at Help:Referencing for beginners to create references in proper ref format in your Sandbox. If you cannot find publications about her, then the effort is futile. David notMD (talk) 15:52, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: Is your boss by any chance Laura Lindenfield? If so, I think that you will have a very difficult time finding the sources you'll need for a draft article on a living person in which each and every statement has to have a reliable reference. When I Google her name, I get a number of sources but they are virtually all based on interviews (or are on websites clearly linked to her), so are not WP:INDEPENDENT. The nearest I can find that might be OK is this one at science.org which probably reaches the WP:SIGCOV for notability (specifically in her case WP:NACADEMIC) but still seems, by using language like "She is passionate about...", to take a tone that Wikipedia would not use (see WP:NPOV). Your best bet, I think, is to draft a very short article using such independent sources and then not be too disappointed if the Draft is declined: that will at least prove you have tried! Make sure you start by complying with the mandatory disclosures described at WP:PAID. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Text Allignment[edit] Any idea on text alignment in table. I want to center align some text in tables, using visual editor. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:44, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible I think you'd probably need to use wikisource code for that, using the "text-align:center; parameter. PS: I've tweaked the demo warning you placed on your sandbox page as you'd left the nowiki commands in which stop it from working. So the warning now looks like it's come from me, but obviously isn't a real vandalism warning. The best way to leave warnings is to enable WP:TWINKLE in your Preferences. Then it does it automatically for you via menu options, plus a whole lot more. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thanks for the edit. I know it is not a real vandalism warning. It is just my sandbox. If I had done something wrong, then you would have told me in the talk page. But anyway to get to the point, I have already TWINKLE enabled. I used it to start delete discussions, and got myself blocked for being thought to be a sockpuppet, since that page was created by another sock, and the sock with whom the checkusers thought me to be linked had edit warred with the previous sock. Anyway thats not the point. What you are saying is that it will give me warnings. Can you specify what warning, or what type of warnings??? Also it would be really kind of you, if you could tell me in a more precise way of how to use wikisource code, suddenly while I am writing in normal language. For example I am using "text-align:center" here, but nothing is happening. Please tell me the way, to center text in a table while using visual or source editor. Thanks for the answer, and regards. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible As I replied to you on my sandbox, it's important that you are editing tables and complex entries in WP:Source Editor not Visual Editor. Did you follow my instructions on how to switch between them, and did it work? You will get nowhere with anything other than the simplest of tables if you stick to VE. The parameter I mentioned above is wiki markup - as written with Source Editor. So, go to the table I put in my sandbox for you at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 Click 'Edit Source' next to the heading to open the section in Source Editor. (Tell me if that function is not showing, as it means you've not forced it to display via your personal Preferences setting. My default is for it to offer me both editing tools all the time - it should be yours, too, especially if you're working on tables.) Search for the word 'center' and you'll see 101 examples - one controlling each cell of data. Regarding WP:TWINKLE: Go to your own userpage. Use the drop down menu box marked 'TW' to access the Twinkle menu. The first sub-item is WARN. This opens a menu box for you to explore the various options. Try leaving yourself a first level warning against vandalism, then a second, and then a third. I can't explain all the options here for you - we expect editors to very carefully' learn for themselves how to use these powerful tools (which can easily upset other users). So read the TWINKLE page and the accompanying Documentation to understand what it can do. But it covers most of the common issues of edit waring, content removal, addition of uncited content, harassment, conflict of interest, spamming, plus single issue notices like encouragement to use edit summaries, biting newcomers, etc etc. There is a complete list of warning templates (here). Nick Moyes (talk) 10:33, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes the edit source function is showing. Also I thought that you were telling me of editing error warnings, so I asked what type of warnings. I had pasted that warning in my sandbox just to see how it looks. I knew how to use twinkle. For the table related thing, I want to know where should I place "text-align:center; parameter? I have made my edit on your sandbox. You can see that, and tell me if it is right or wrong. You will see that the table I created, it has some errors. For the channel name column I thought of adding my talk page and then renaming the wiki link as "Itcouldbepossible". But it showed up like this: ([3]) - why??? While your wiki link it redirects it to the teahouse it shows Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel? How come??? Why cannot I edit my wiki link to show my username, while on clicking it redirects to my talk page. For example yours show Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel and it redirects to WP:TH Why is mine not like that?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 11:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Tables[edit] Today I was editing random articles, when I came across Nach Baliye. I was reading the article, trying to find for any errors, when I came across this table [4]. I just sort of went mad seeing this table. Just a well formatted and advanced table, with all the color schemes, and just nice cell merging. Can anyone, for heaven's sake tell me how that table was created with all those attractive features. I don't really think that the Wiki markup was typed out. There must be some modern graphical interface, for doing such a tedious thing. I want to know how that table was created. I would really be glad, if I get the answer from someone who is an expert in this matter, and has been editing Wikipedia for a couple of years, because, I want the exact and precise method of creating such a table. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:58, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I've been editing for over 10 years and wouldn't dare to create such a thing. I have, however, created very long data tables by starting in Excel, getting all the sorting, the text and the wikilinks and in the right places before exporting it with a tool to Wikimarkup. But I'm not aware of a tool to make tables look pretty like that - so I shall await for answers from other users more experienced in such things, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: It takes work, often over time with improvements by different editors, often starting with copying the format from another page. The first similar table in the article was added by an IP here with edit summary "added table like other shows Jhalak". That may refer to Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart or an earlier season. It could maybe be tracked further back but I haven't tried. Help:Table has general help but it's complicated. Much of it is the same or similar as HTML tables which some editors already know. PrimeHunter (talk) 16:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @PrimeHunter Yes, but how did that specific table appear in Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart. How was it created??? And also I wanted to know one thing, how on Earth did you find that specific page history, when the table was added?? I have seen many people doing so. Is their anyway of finding out when a specific edit was first made, and the what edits followed?? I really don't think that you flicked through the page history. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible There are various ways to find when an edit was first made. The slow way is to look at 500 edits in View History at a time. Let's assume that covers the entire history (if not, just increase the number to 5000 in the url bar), then you can find a rough midway point, click (and note down) the date you clicked. Is the edit showing there? IF yes, go down and divide the lower half of edits into half again, and select another date to click. Is the edit there? If 'No', then it will have been made between those two date points. Divide the edits roughly in half again and then again until you find the first one where that edit was made. Doing this in conjunction with looking at View History (green numbers are positive count of bytes added/red are negative overall additions) makes this just a few minutes work. It took me just a few moments to do that for Nach Baliye, speeded up by using Ctrl-F to search for 'Scoring Chart', of which there were 823 mentions in the edit summaries. I went to the lowest one, then scrolled down a dozen or so edits further and found a massive addition by an IP on 9 March 2019 with a very helpful edit summary. Job done. Of course, that's the slow way. For simplest way to find when a short text string was first added to an article is to copy it, then go to the View History tab. Just above all the row entries, click Find addition/removal to use the 'WikiBlame' tool. Be aware that by default it only searches 500 of the latest edits before the date selected. So it will miss the first addition of text if it's a very heavily edited page as this one is unless you spend time to understand how to take advantage of the tool's searching features. I wouldn't use it to search for a chart being added, but I might focus on just one unique element or keyword in that chart. Hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks, I learnt a new thing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 10:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the answer. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Prime Healthcare[edit] My interest in CAlifornia health systems drew me to Prime Healthcare, where I was struck by the difference in how Wiki editors handle the material. Whereas large systems such as Sutter and Kaiser are given the opportunity to list history, background, hospital names, etc, Prime's editing history is aggressive and heavy handed. The result is a page listing controversy and nothing else. Prime owns 45 hospitals nationwide, employs 50000 people, but you wouldn't know it by Wiki. BTW I am in no way affiliated or compensated by Prime; my research is for a graduate program. I'm just amazed at the discrepancy and poor treatment. I haven't researched it enough to determine whether sources should be improved on deleted materials, but that is different than what edit history shows. Any attempts to improve the page are immediately deleted wholesale, in apparent violation of Wiki editing rules. (I attempted to undo some edits myself) Can anyone explain this? Prime owner Prem Reddy has made a number of enemies with his handling of labor, etc. Is that at play here? Archie515 (talk) 16:46, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Prime Healthcare Services Karenthewriter (talk) 17:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Archie515. Welcome to the Teahouse! You can discuss the issue about the content of the article on the article's talk page. The concerned editors might engage in the conversation and help you in finding a possible solution. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 17:24, 23 November 2021 (UTC) thanks but page monitors refuse to allow access and have not responded to talk page requests in the past. Now locked out from making any changes to sources. Page is an embarrassment to all Wiki contributors. Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC)Archie515Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The Controversy section is well supported by reliable published sources. It's Prime Healthcare that should be embarrassed. Maproom (talk) 23:04, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Archie515: I see you posted twice at Talk:Prime Healthcare Services. The last piece of advice you were given there was to make a specific request. I suggest you think about the worst problem with the article, and then post a specific detailed suggestion on the talk page, such as: Please change the current article text "_____________" to "_____________" based on the independent reliable source found at ___________________. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Disambiguation-links tag on redirects[edit] In this edit I intentionally changed a redirect from targeting an article to targeting a disambiguation page. To my surprise, the "adding disambiguation links" tag was added. In a way, it makes sense (I added a link to a disambiguation page), but on the other hand, the tag is probably meant for when someone adds a link in an article without knowing it's a disambiguation page, like if I added a link to Georgia or Mercury in an article. Can something be changed so that this tagging isn't activated when the end result of the edit is a redirect? I reported this at WP:EF/FP but was sent here for a reason I don't understand: the responding editor said both that the tag isn't activated and that it's working properly. 72.77.45.188 (talk) 17:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The edit filter (which interdicts edits) is separate from the tagging system (which describes what an edit is). —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 17:38, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Do anyone think like that?[edit] Are there people actually thinking that this page represents a universal and unbiased point of view? Owerthise (talk) 18:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I think like that. It doesn't seem biased to me. What direction do you think it's biased in? Maproom (talk) 18:43, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think there is such a thing as an universal point of view, certainly not about a topic connected to religion. It looks neutral to me; it may not be perfect (no article is) but there are no obvious problems. --bonadea contributions talk 19:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Owerthise: Welcome to the Teahouse! If you have a specific suggestion to improve the article, please post it on Talk:Muhammad with a reliable source and the {{edit extended-protected}} template, and another editor will review your request. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Help with revision[edit] Hello! I'm trying to revise the first two paragraphs of the Cultural context section of Cueva de las Manos and I need help with it. I've already put in a copy edit request for the whole page with the Guild of Copyeditors, but I was wondering if there was a group/person willing to help with this particular section in the meantime. I'm trying to revise the section in accordance with the following advice of FunkMonk in the talk page: There is some repetition in how you describe the paintings were returned to and were influential for the people throughout many thousands of years, perhaps check if someone of it can be consolidated or made less similar. If anyone would be willing to lend a hand in this respect it would be much appreciated. If there is a better place to ask for such help, I would be grateful if someone could point me there. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Best, Tyrone Madera (talk) 18:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) This might be better for the Talk Page, but one possible way to consolidate this might be to write this instead, which combines two separate statements: However, that so many people contributed to the artwork for thousands of years suggests the cave held great significance for the artists, with earlier groups influencing later ones through a continuous narrative, playing out over millennia. But that's just one possibility. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 18:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing this Ayaelmelegy (talk) 22:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Ayaelmelegy, and welcome to the Teahouse. I'm afraid there is quite a lot you need to do before that draft is publishable. The things that caught my attention are: Remove all the links to interviews. There are restrictions on the use of External links in articles, and in any case Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. Format all the references so that a reviewer can readily evaluate which of them are likely to be most reliable and independent. See REFB, and WP:NONENG. With you anonymous URLs it is hard to see whether your draft establishes that she meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. Remove all the evaluative language. No article should ever describe anything in Wikipedia's voice as "one of the most important" or "much needed". I get that you strongly approve of Hamdy's work, but none of that must come out in the article: it must be a neutral summary of what the independent sources say about her - and if there is criticism, then you should probably summarise that too. (You can quote a source that described something as "important" or "much needed" but you need to make sure that it is a source which is wholly unconnected with the subject). Please also see WP:NOTSOAPBOX. --ColinFine (talk) 23:12, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I did some edits would you please check them? Thank you — Preceding unsigned comment added by Ayaelmelegy (talk • contribs) 00:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) new wikipedia page[edit]  2600:1700:9C80:62E0:89ED:2A1E:FE48:ACD3 (talk) 22:08, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome. If you want to create a new article(not a page), that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content. If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Unregistered users(as well as new accounts) cannot directly create new articles. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) What do you do on this page[edit]  Jenay Ava (talk) 22:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Jenay Ava Welcome to the Teahouse. What we do is welcome new users and assist them with any problems they may encounter whilst editing Wikipedia. We recognise that it can be a steep learning curve to begin with, so we try to make that journey a little smoother for you in the hope that you will stick around and become one of our many regular contributors. Unfortunately, looking at your very first few contributions, I fear you think Wikipedia talk pages might be like a chat forum. They are not, and all we do here is help build the worlds greatest online encyclopaedia, and use the talk pages to assist us in that task. You'd be most welcome to help with this undertaking (6.2 million+ article in English so far), but this place is not a social media chat site. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:40, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Help writing a page[edit] I have the page written and now need to post to wikipedia, I have akk the references. Please help, FletcherEmma (talk) 23:37, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @FletcherEmma welcome to Tea House!. If you want to create a new article, that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content.If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. I have been editing the errors on Draft:Gehad Hamdy for while. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing? Thank you. Ayaelmelegy (talk) 00:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, some things need to be improved: (1) the article must have a lead portion (the introduction should not have a heading), (2) there should not be no links or Arabic letters in section headings, (3) there is too much text in the infobox, and Arabic text isn't needed there. There are other things, but you can start with this. Regards. — Alalch Emis (talk) 00:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) STATUS: Draft nominated for Speedy deletion and creating editor blocked as suspected sock (denies). David notMD (talk) 01:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have overhauled (Major Cleanup) the article (This specifically). Jairus is doing... ?? 02:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ayaelmelegy: Draft:Gehad Hamdy has no references in the "Biography" and "Speak Up" sections. Please add more independent reliable sources to your draft before submitting for AfC. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 06:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) GoingBatty, "Ayaelmelegy" got an indefinite block six hours before your last (and of course well-intentioned) message. -- Hoary (talk) 12:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Ongoing Events Section[edit] What happened with the ongoing events section on both the desktop website and the mobile website? It used to be a nicely categorized, bulleted set of news. But not it's just hyperlinks to specific wikipedia pages. I would use the previous style daily, it was a wonderful source for news. I wonder if there is a good reason for removing it, or if it was potentially even an oversight. Regardless I loved that feature and don't want to lose it :( 47.229.202.202 (talk) 01:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Are you confusing Portal:Current events/Sidebar and Portal:Current events? Both are linked from "In the news" on Main Page, on "Ongoing" and "Other recent events". PrimeHunter (talk) 02:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Rv tags[edit] Hello. Is it possible to remove tags? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Possibly - which tags were you considering removing, and why? GoingBatty (talk) 06:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty, no, I've no reason, I've seen some users who edit without any tags. So I asked. Can the tags be removed without any reason? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: When tags are removed from an article, it's assumed that the problems they highlight have been resolved. If an editor feels that a tag was removed prematurely, they'll add it back at their own discretion. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Tenryuu, I didn't tell about the tags of article. I told about editing tags such as "2017 wikitext editor". Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 07:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: There is a difference between Wikipedia:Tags and Wikipedia:Templates I see you removed the {{under construction}} template from the Carlos Moguel Jr. article in this edit, but you cannot remove the tag "2017 wikitext editor" from the edit. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 07:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Those are not removable. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reftoolbar[edit] How to change the date format for Reftoolbar? from Dmy to mdy. Thanks. —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Welcome to the Teahouse! It appears that there is a discussion about this at Wikipedia talk:RefToolbar#Date formats. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) User level[edit] Hi, I wanted to know how I can add a user level. I mean there will be a bar on my user page, and it will fill up as I edit articles. And beside it would be written, my next user level. Any idea on how to do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Here's a workaround, Itcouldbepossible. Just edit articles, constructively. Soon you will be "extended confirmed". Most people are, and few people will be surprised or much interested to know that you are. There are some other very minor superpowers that you can acquire; but again, few people will be interested. Some superpowers are a bit out of the ordinary, and you might want to advertise one or other of these; on the other hand, advertising them may seem somewhat vulgar. Best is to aim to be an article-improving Clark Kent. -- Hoary (talk) 11:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible Welcome to Tea House! As @Itcouldbepossible stated, it's rarely of interest to anyone else. This essay on WP:HATCOLLECTING could be useful on the mostly harms/some benefits of gamifying your user page with statistics. I do indulge myself with Wikipedia:Service awards as a way of marking specific tiers of editing. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 12:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Dead Links[edit] I see that many pages have something called 'dead links'. What are these so called 'dead links', and how can I make them alive again?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) For information about dead links, read WP:Dead links. --David Biddulph (talk) 09:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks again for the answer Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Add (journalist) to title[edit] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anshuman_Tiwari Can you write this in brackets as journalist because it is journalist? You can write Journalist in back of their name in brackets. Coolblack4 (talk) 10:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Coolblack4, and welcome to the Teahouse. We use a term in parenthesis like that in an article title only when it is necessary to distinguish between different people (or other subjects) with the same name. See WP:Disambiguation. --ColinFine (talk) 11:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Something drastic certainly should be done to this article. Sample: In digital journalism, he has created and successfully established an innovative and exclusive multilingual digital first content vertical moneybhaskar.com for Danik Bhaskar Group, DB Corp. It is the largest Hindi business portal and offers guidance, utility and wisdom based jargon free economic-business and investment content to aspiring readers in Hindi. (For one thing, I wonder what is being excluded.) -- Hoary (talk) 12:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Distracting AFC submission templates[edit] Does anyone know how to collapse or get the "this topic is not notable" AFC submission templates out of the way? I'm trying to work on a draft article, and they're distracting and take up about half of the page. wizzito | say hello! 12:43, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Those templates were put there for the benefit of reviewers, and of anyone who might want to work on improving the draft. You should not remove or collapse them. That's why they all say "Do not remove this line!" Maproom (talk) 13:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thing is, they are INCREDIBLY distracting to look at, I at least want to move them to the bottom at the page if I can't collapse or make them invisible. I just can't have them taking up 90% of the page from the top, it bothers me a lot and prevents me from working. wizzito | say hello! 13:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Reality shifting has been Declined three times and Rejected twice. I have restored the Declined and Rejection and Comments to the top of the article, where those belong. David notMD (talk) 14:23, 24 November 2021 (UTC) If you believe you can rescue this with better references, do so, but be aware that Rejected drafts are likely to be deleted and 'salted.' Make sure you have an off-Wikipedia copy. And understand that 'salted' means that an Administrator's approval would be needed to try again to create a draft on this topic. David notMD (talk) 14:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there seriously no way to get these to the bottom of the page (where they are still visible) or make them look less distracting? Your comments aren't helping me, sorry. Also, I am still working on the article; I had to rewrite it from scratch because the original user who created the draft made it look very bad and had bad formatting and grammar. (Also, they kept resubmitting it multiple times despite not addressing the concerns, I haven't submitted it yet.) It isn't anything speedy deletable (see Wikipedia:Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity), there's a Washington Post report and a scholarly article on the subject, but probably just needs to be worked on and more RS might need to be made before it gets published. wizzito | say hello! 14:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Declines and Rejections are considered a required part of draft history, so that the next reviewer can check if the weaknesses identified by previous reviewers have been addressed. Given that you have taken over a draft created and edited by other editors, you can leave a Comment to that effect with the other Comments. David notMD (talk) 14:39, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there no way to at least move it to a part of the page where it's visible by people contributing and reviewers, but not as distracting as a glob that takes up the first part of the page? If not, I may just have to move it to my userspace and work on it from there. wizzito | say hello! 14:42, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David notMD noting for the record I have reverted you; @Wizzito offers up a convincing reason why they moved them down, because it was distracting for them, and as long as they move them back up before resubmitting I see no issue with that move. That is ignoring the question whether or not these templates are relevant at all considering the rewrite currently ongoing, although it appears that at least some of the original text still exists. -- Asartea Talk | Contribs 15:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have added a Comment that you are in the process of completely revising the draft. Do as much as you can before submitting. I know nothing about the topic, but will mention that as it stand now, the lead is over-referenced. Pick at most three refs to support the Lead. Those refs and the others may be used in the body of the article, as more detail on history, reception, criticism, etc. is added. David notMD (talk) 14:47, 24 November 2021 (UTC) That's because I was working on it, putting the references in so I can use them later, and then delete the ref in the lead when I've finished reviewing the source and using it to source statements. You act like a draft should have the same standards as mainspace, and besides, I moved it to userspace anyways so I can work on it. wizzito | say hello! 14:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You didn't move it, you copied & pasted the content, so please read about copying within Wikipedia. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I want to pitch in from an outside editor. 5 declined templates, 2 separate comments, and 1 draft template? I know if I was unaware of all Wikipedia policies, this would feel very WP:BITEy to me. Is there not a better solution, in the form of an {{articlehistory}} style template? I understand why the need for all the notices (for future reviewers to know at a glance), but there can be so many better ways to do this now. --JackFromWisconsin (talk | contribs) 14:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I feel like a lot of people in this thread are being BITEy too... wizzito | say hello! 15:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My intention was to proffer advice on how to create a draft that is more likely to be accepted. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I understand, but I feel as if my questions weren't answered and were just met with a "don't do this" or "don't do that" and reverts. wizzito | say hello! 15:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Tendentious editing[edit] This is not marked as an essay. This is also not marked with the green symbol for policy, guidelines pages. So, how important are these types of guideline pages? Knight Skywalker (talk) 12:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very important. It's a supplementary explantion to the guideline WP:DE, and carries the same status. Mjroots (talk) 13:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Mjroots: If this is very important, then why Wikipedia is not including the green symbol in the box? --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I didn't use the bold format, but still the above lines are showing as in bold to me. --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You used the bold format by putting a semi-colon before the colon at the start of the line. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I've fixed the bold. Mjroots (talk) 16:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) This page is not one of Wikipedia's policies or guidelines, as it has not been thoroughly vetted by the community. Also it has category. Wikipedia essays (?) (±) Knight Skywalker (talk) 17:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Markup[edit] Is there any introduction page, or help page, or user guide page for Wikipedia Markup. If there is then please provide me. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Itcouldbepossible, you may be looking for Help:Wikitext. DanCherek (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks for the Wiki Help page, I am surely going to read it. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Page[edit] As you see now, my talk page has become a little clumsy. What is the way to make it clean? Should I archive them or is there any other option? Seeking for options. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: While you're allowed to delete conversations from your own talk page, archiving is recommended because it makes it more convenient for you and other editors to find those old conversations in the future. There are a few different ways to archive a talk page – you can do it manually or have a bot help you – and there is more information about each of those at Help:Archiving a talk page. DanCherek (talk) 14:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek I have archived the archival messages left by a bot on my talk page and have shifted them here. But I cannot move the three notification to three different headings, it is coming under a single heading. Please can you help me in that respect. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The first section starts with {| so you need to end it with |}. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Newcomers[edit] How, can I find all newcomers on Wikipedia??? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:08, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: You can find them at Special:Log/newusers but for what purpose ? 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA (talk) 15:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) IP blocking for 31 hours[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… I hope you don’t mind me asking this question: When administrators impose a block on IP addresses for the first time, the length of the block is usually 31 hours (1 day, 7 hours). Do you have any idea why administrators chose this value? Thanks. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 15:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC). It's so that they don't just wait 24 and return to the same things. 31h is also a standard length in the blocking dropdown menu and has been since before I was an admin. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Imagine a kid messing around in study hall, causing a school's IP to be blocked. A 24-hour block would allow him or her to come back the next day during the same period to cause more trouble. Deor (talk) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Amkgp is Sock editing[edit] Hi, first I was blocked on the ground of thinking to be a sockpuppet, and the sockpuppet investigation was raised by an ipv6 ip 2402:3A80:6E1:9A2E:A110:65A0:5AD7:4F15. The sock investigation page is here. In the Clerk, CheckUser, and/or patrolling admin comments section Blablubbs commented and said The filer is obviously Amkgp loutsocking. I blocked them for a bit. Then after the block expired then again another comment was added by ipv6 user 2402:3A80:1A4E:9197:C5B8:CED1:C0FD:9A1D, and then blablubbs blocked the ipv6 again. When it was proved that I am not a sockpuppet, this ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:A17E:9C61:AA1F:59E2:32A2 came and added welcomed me. Till date, I could not understand anything, why an ipv6 was coming an leaving me messages on my talk page. Today again an ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA came and gave me a vandalism warning on an edit that I made two articles namely, Piet van der Sluijs and Dré Saris, where I had only added a more reference needted tag using twinkle. It was my mistake or not is a far matter, but then he leaves me another link to learn wikipedia in under an hour link. He also answers one of my questions in the teahouse. The thing is all these ipv6 start with 2402:3A80, and blablubbs has stated previously that it is block evasion of sock amkgp. Now what is to be done? Should I raise a sockpuppet investigation request?? Would it be possible to block just huge range ipv6s? Please give me suggestion in this matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 16:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Also in there sockpuppet investigation page [[5]] we can see that the suspected sock puppets ipv6 also starts with 2402:3A80. We can also see that he got blocked because he used to edit logged out for a couple of time, and he was blocked for that reason. And also in a further section we see that he also used or uses 2409:4061::/36 this ipv6 range. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Itcouldbepossible (talk • contribs) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Article Not Published - not adequate sources[edit] Hi, I am trying to publish an article about a triceratops skull nicknamed 'Dragon King' which was sold last year which is the biggest skull ever found, but the article was rejected due to a lack of sources. The sale was private so there wasn't a lot of press generated, but what there was is referenced. The skull is definitely the biggest in the world. How would I go about validating that? Would an image of the skull with dimensions count? What could I use to validate it. Any suggestions would be very welcome. I should make clear that I have no financial stake in this at all, it is simply a fact that the skull is the biggest found and I think should be public information. Maudjohnson90 (talk) 16:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Maudjohnson90 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Wikipedia articles summarize what publicly available independent reliable sources say about a topic. If a topic is not sufficiently covered in such sources, it cannot be on Wikipedia. Documents in private hands or otherwise not available to the public cannot be used as sources here. Did no sources cover this sale, or its discovery? If some did, but not enough for a standalone article, there may be an existing article this could be mentioned in. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Shouldn't you first put any reliable information at Triceratops#Size, Maudjohnson90? That's a pretty well-watched article and if you think that particular skull needs another full article, you could discuss that on the Talk Page at Talk:Triceratops Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:59, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks Mike Turnbull! I have added information under Triceratops#Skull and that has remained since I added it. I'll discuss on the Talk Page as suggested. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Maudjohnson90 (talk • contribs) 17:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Final Publish[edit] Hello Sir, how much time does it take for the draft to get finally published ? Thank you. Johnalphanso (talk) 17:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You have not created nor submitted a draft to Articles for Creation. Is there a particular draft you are interested in? — Preceding unsigned comment added by David notMD (talk • contribs) 18:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Johnalphanso, and welcome to the Teahouse. There is no simple answer to your quewstion: a draft takes as long to be published as it takes. There is no queue, no schedule, no deadline: all editors are volunteers, and work on what they choose when they choose. If you're talking about Draft:Sanskar Desai, that will not get reviewed until it is submitted for review (add {{subst:AFC/draft}} to the top). But it will not get accepted until somebody follows Theroadislong's advice in the comment and removes all the unreliable sources from the list. It will likely not get accepted until somebody reformats the references from a useless list of URLs to a meaningful set of citations - see CITE. There are probably other things that need improving too: in particular, the question of whether it has been worked on by a paid editor. --ColinFine (talk) 18:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How do I contribute images?[edit]  Bettertoseeit (talk) 19:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Bettertoseeit Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please review WP:UPIMAGE carefully. It's not as easy to do as it may appear. You must be autoconfirmed(account is four days old with 10 edits or more) to upload images yourself, but you can visit Files for upload to get assistance with doing so if not autoconfirmed. 331dot (talk) 19:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating Book Pages[edit] Hello. One of the reasons I became an editor was an interest in filling some of the gaps in bibliographies I am familiar with. What I'm unsure about is if an author has a large bibliography with Wiki articles already created for most of their books (for example; Stephen Baxter bibliography), am I safe in assuming I can create pages for those novels which do not have an article, or might the lack of an article be for a reason? Thanks in advance. John Bullock (talk) 20:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Such novels still have to be independently notable. Ruslik_Zero 20:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Jbullock83 Welcome to Tea House! In general, a notable author does not mean their books are automatically notable and vice versa, see WP:NOTINHERIT, however in the book specific Wikipedia:Notability (books) guidelines, it does mention certain famous authors' books are likely to be automatically notable. Anything by Jane G. Austin for example, but another editor may disagree. Looking at specific notability criteria for the books themselves would be the most forward process. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 20:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the info/reply! Ruslik, Shushugah. John Bullock (talk) 21:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) ASIAN MONTH[edit] i would like to ask if my translated ( not fully complete article counts for the ediathon asian month in order to get a postcard Georgekagian (talk) 21:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian Welcome to Tea House! Your question is better asked on Wikipedia talk:Wikipedia Asian Month/2021 but if you add {{WAM talk 2021}} to the talk page of said article, a WikiProject judge will determine its eligibility for you. I doubt a full translation is needed, since each article can be independently edited anyways. It needs to comply with English Wikipedia WP:5 Principles whereas it may differ in other languages. Thank you for the question and happy editing! Good luck with the edit-a-thon! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 21:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian, looking at here, it looks like it counts unless it was a pure machine translation (e.g. Google Translate) that you didn't copy edit to correct any errors. {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 21:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) What did I do wrong?[edit] I'm the guy who created the article for Legends of the Multiverse: Draft:Legends of the Multiverse, just wondering why you rejected it? LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1057011990" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 22:08 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH PrimeHunter, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 Autoconfirmed user 2 Template:Uw-create-kept 3 Audio sample 4 How to create Article page for Musical Artist 5 section formatting 6 Citing Manga 7 Problem with visual editor 8 How can I remove a website from spam or black list? 9 Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page 10 Verify my article and undelete it 11 "Can you plz help" 12 Sandbox 13 Biology 14 Help moving my draft 15 Paw partol 16 Reaching a consensus 17 I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page 18 Why i cant see my name on wikipedia?? 19 Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps 20 pokemon showdown 21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath 22 I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ? 23 A Request to add Template to talk page 24 Is Imslp a good source to back up my information? 25 Vandalism 26 My Talk Archives vanished 27 Heading correction 28 Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search? 29 how do i seen how many edits i have 30 English 31 Science 32 Bold, Italics, or Quotes? 33 Visual Editing 34 Creating a page ethically 35 Text Allignment 36 Wiki Tables 37 Prime Healthcare 38 Disambiguation-links tag on redirects 39 Do anyone think like that? 40 Help with revision 41 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 42 new wikipedia page 43 What do you do on this page 44 Help writing a page 45 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 46 Ongoing Events Section 47 Rv tags 48 Reftoolbar 49 User level 50 Dead Links 51 Add (journalist) to title 52 Distracting AFC submission templates 53 Wikipedia:Tendentious editing 54 Wikipedia Markup 55 My Talk Page 56 Newcomers 57 IP blocking for 31 hours 58 Amkgp is Sock editing 59 Article Not Published - not adequate sources 60 Final Publish 61 How do I contribute images? 62 Creating Book Pages 63 ASIAN MONTH 64 What did I do wrong? Most recent archives 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131, 1132 Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yep, @Patrick Vedel you should just close that and/or any other notes you might have and proceed to edit said article. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The sentences 2 - 5 are there in case they don't know about them. Faster than Thunder (talk) 06:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: & @Nick Moyes: thank you for guidance. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 07:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) How to create Article page for Musical Artist[edit]  Jasonseah69 (talk) 23:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69 Welcome to the Teahouse, and thank you for asking. Creating a Wikipedia article from scratch is the hardest task for anyone to achieve here - especially for a newcomer. Trying to write one about yourself is fraught with problems and issues, and will be seen as WP:PROMOTION. See our Conflict of Interest and AUTOBIOGRAPHY advice, too. But most of all, see WP:NMUSIC - this is a shortcut link to our essential Notability criteria for musicians. If you cannot find multiple, independent, in-depth sources that have written about you in detail (ignore your own PR output), and you don't meet any of the music notability criteria, then I'm afraid there's no chance. But if you feel you do meet those criteria, it's still best to leave it to someone who wants to write about you - not try to do it yourself. That person should then gain experience in editing here for some time, and then read This Guide on creating an article and submitting it for review through our Articles for Creation process, before it goes through our final 'New Page Review' process and is allowed to remain in the encyclopaedia. That's a brief outline of the process. Please do not attempt to use your Wikipedia WP:USERPAGE to write about yourself, or it will be deleted. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Good advice above. NB take "someone who wants to write about you" to mean "someone who, unprompted, wants to write about you". Not somebody asked (let alone paid) to do so. -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69: Welcome to the teahouse. You can create an article, or just submit using a draft for the Articles for Creation. However, if there aren't any sources, if may be deleted, so take your own risks for creating an article, or for less risks, create a draft. To create one, go to Wikipedia:Draft. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Severestorm28, please be aware that Jasonseah69 has only made three edits, is not autoconfirmed, and therefore cannot create an article directly. Also, their user page has been deleted as G11 - unambiguous advertising or promotion. Cullen328 (talk) 01:26, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cullen328: Next time-if someone is not autoconfirmed, and advertising, I'm giving them a warning. Thanks for the reminder. Severestorm28 (talk) 14:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) section formatting[edit] I had a draft reviewed and the reviewer suggested I use "==Section Formatting==". I cannot find any information on ==Section Formatting== on any of the help pages. Can someone send me a link which explains what ==Section Formatting== is and how to implement it? I appreciate the review and suggestions. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Looking at your draft, it's divided into headings using bold text titles, which isn't how articles are typically ordered here. If you replace the bold formatting on your section titles with two equals signs on either side, it'll create a more traditional section header for each title, which also then forces the page to create a table of contents and allows easier navigation. ??????? ? 00:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Thank You. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:47, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage COURTESY: Draft:Peebles Homestead You fixed that, but there are other problems. Several descriptive paragraphs have no references. Much of the content about his military service is general history, i.e., not about him (nor is it about the house). Hence, not relevant. David notMD (talk) 02:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) your draft has great promise. The section on the homestead today used one reference source three times, so I reformatted the citations so that the references are combined. You did a good job of finding references, can any of your sources be used for paragraphs that have no references? If not, where did you find the data about the house dimensions and construction details? If it was from a published source (such as a history book or local newspaper article) those can be used as a reference. Unfortunately, if it was from an unpublished source (such as handwritten notes found at a historical society) that would be considered original research and can't be used as a reference. You'll need to do some more work on your draft, but I'm sure it can be improved enough to be accepted. Keep up the good work. Karenthewriter (talk) 09:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Ownership gap between 1838 and 1994. David notMD (talk) 10:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Karenthewriter, Thanks for combining my multiple citations; I couldn't figure that out! The dimensions for the house (and other observations) came from me. I measured the house to see if the dimensions matched the 1798 Tax records, but I'm sure I can find them in other sources, especially the State Museum Survey. Also, I think the few sentences about Peebles' military record are relevant, because his military service adds credibility to the comment that the property could be eligible for the National Register. Without a notable person, places like Monticello and Montpelier would just be old brick houses. I could insert his military service elsewhere. Thoughts? Granted, Peebles service and the Cumberland County Militia could be separate articles which I can't do right now. I will clean up my citations. SharedHeritage (talk) 01:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @SharedHeritage: To answer your original question, see MOS:SECTIONS. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 05:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) I'm glad I could help with your multiple citations. I've been an editor since 2007 and I just recently mastered that skill. There's a lot to learn. As David notMD stated the information about Peebles military service isn't about the homestead you're writing about, so a reviewer might feel its unnecessary. (I'm not a reviewer, so I am no expert on that subject.) You mention Peebles received two different land grants. Did he receive any of his land due to his military service? If so you could state that, which would tie in the homestead with him being in the military. I live in northwest Pennsylvania, and some of the area's earliest settlers apparently received land because of their Revolutionary War service, so that's why I asked about the land grants. One thing you need to be aware of is that Wikipedia does not want any original research, or writers speculating on what happened. (To quote Sergeant Friday from the old TV show Dragnet – "Just the facts, ma'am.") So I'm a bit concerned about such phrases as "it is reasonable to believe that the windows are original..." and "The two front doors were likely replaced at this time," for that reads as though you are guessing or giving an opinion. You can quote someone and say that researcher Joe Smart-Guy believes the windows are original, and give a reference citation, but don't make it sound as though it's your conclusion. Remember that you're writing an encyclopedia article for the general reading public, and not trying to convince a historical commission to add the house to the National Register. I hope I'm not overwhelming your with details, but I'm aware that writing for Wikipedia means following Wikipedia rules. Best wishes on your research and writing project. Karenthewriter (talk) 05:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Manga[edit] Hi, I'm new to Wikipedia. I am currently trying to figure out how to add a small detail to a page about Kennedy Space Center in Pop Culture. I'm wondering how I should cite the manga volumes of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure for the details I need. Should I use a pre-existing source on Wikipedia to the volumes that links to the publisher's website, or should i use the ISBN and author info as my citation? Cheese420 (talk) 04:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Author, book title, place, publisher, year, ISBN, and page number, Cheese420. And perhaps additional info besides, such as details of the original publication. -- Hoary (talk) 05:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cheese420 I'm going to disagree with @Hoary here. For a WP-pop cult section, you don't cite the manga, you cite a WP:RS that noticed that the manga had the KSC in it and bothered to write something about it, like at least some of the films are mentioned at [1]. Anything in that section without a decent secondary source should be removed. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) That would be better, yes. (But I'd rather got the impression that that was a lost cause.) If a secondary source comments on the pop culture item and one can cite the former, wouldn't the listing be more informative if publication details of the pop culture item itself were supplied as well? -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I will not object to adding primary source as well, but personally I wouldn't bother. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Compare, for example, Death Note at Donald Trump in popular culture. Warning, the DT article has some scary stuff. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Shocking stuff indeed, Gråbergs Gråa Sång. Not least the revelation that "Trump has an article on the online encyclopedia Wikipedia." (Well I never!) -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I may have to disagree here too, that does seem the least shocking item to me ;-) Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Problem with visual editor[edit] When I edit wikitables using Visual Editor, the tools doesn't work, I'm trying to edit a text within the table but whenever I tap the wikitable, it goes lock. Can anyone help me? Anyone? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 05:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Could you tell us which table in which article you're trying to edit? The most common cause that I can think of is that the table's cells are created with templates instead of the usual table syntax, but I have to see the table itself to know. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:46, 22 November 2021 (UTC) In filmography table. After seeing this problem, I've tried to edit in other device, but still not working. Maybe only mobile user can experience this problem. The Visual editor was okay before, it works well, but it is not working now. It's not a template, it's wikitable, could you please help me, I can't edit using visual editor—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 12:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) The question you were asked was "which table in which article"? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Blp articles, or almost all articles that has wikitable. I'm using VE until now because of referencing. But using VE to edit wikitables, doesn't work when using a mobile. The VE is working properly before—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 13:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Please provide the specific name of one article where you are having this issue. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 05:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty: Try to look my sandbox, there is a draft article with a table there. I can't link specific article, because I'm having this problem in all articles that has a table, my example is my sandbox—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: I had no problem editing the wikitable on user:Ctrlwiki/sandbox with VisualEditor with my Windows 10 PC and Google Chrome. What hardware/software are you using? Are you using the Wikipedia app? Or are you using browser on your phone (in mobile view or desktop view)? What do you mean "it goes lock"? Could you please provide a screenshot of that situation? GoingBatty (talk) 15:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How can I remove a website from spam or black list?[edit] Hello I created a page in the sandbox and requested it to be reviewed. For this post, I used various sources, including a site, which I later found out it was blocked. Is it possible for me to request and remove the site from spam or blacklist? How? Also, is there a way to edit my written draft? AlexJan24 (talk) 06:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) hi AlexJan24! your draft is located at Draft:Bitumen penetration testing, feel free to input that in the search bar (including the Draft: prefix) to get to your draft. as for the blacklisted site, what source are you trying to use? theremay be a reason over at WP:RSP as to why it's blacklisted. if you want to add a whitelist for a page in there, you can hop over to MediaWiki talk:Spam-whitelist and request there to whitelist it for your article (but don't forget to read WP:Reliable sources first!). happy editing!  melecie  t - 06:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) thank you @Melecie! :) I want to use this URL: {infinitygalaxy.org/bitumen-penetration-test/} I am pretty sure that it has a good and reliable information. AlexJan24 (talk) 08:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @AlexJan24 This is a commercial website, and content like that is often placed on them to help promote their business and public perception. Can you not find something more academic and less dependent of one particular company? How about https://www.academia.edu/37842763/Penetration_Test_on_Bituminous_Materials ? Nick Moyes (talk) 10:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Nick Moyes, thank you for your suggestion! :) actually, the page you mentioned is good, but does not have the content I want. Moreover it is paid content not free. I am a petrochemical engineer. In fact, I have decided to write about such tests, which are very important and useful in the industry. As compared to other sites, I find this one to have more complete content. AlexJan24 (talk) 13:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page[edit] Hi guys I'm still feeling a bit lost. I have some factually updated text I would like to add to the BDR Thermea page. I have made my identity and intentions clear and being open, honest and upfront. There is no marketing-speak in the text. Please advise how I can place this new text. TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass: As said before, you should file an edit request on the talk page at Talk:BDR Thermea by following the instructions listed at {{Request edit}}. Even though you think the text is neutral, it may not be by Wikipedia's strict standards, so it'd still be better for more experienced editors to take a second look at it before it goes into the article. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 10:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass The best approach is to find the worst-offending sentences. For each one, create a new line and state: For [insert incorrect sentence here] please replace with ['insert better-worded sentence here] [add the url to a reliable source]. Then move on to the next issue and do the same. I fear you may have dumped a huge rewrite request on the talk page which I, for one, would not want to have to deal with. "Slowly slowly catchee monkey" as, I believe, they say. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Nick Moyes Thought I was making things easier for the editors! :) No harm intended. This is my thinking: Removed outdated text, updated facts and figures, and added a par on their new strategic focus. The company has undergone has lot of change since the original text was created. Have endeavoured to keep it short, sharp and factual and externally validated where I can. Still incorrect? I am no coder and find it really hard to navigate around Wikipedia. Sorry to be a bother but any help really appreciated.TracyMelass (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Verify my article and undelete it[edit]  Itswajidshaikh00 (talk) 11:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft_talk:Wajid_shaikh I see a draft whose text is "Hey team, i just created a page of living person autobiography with reliable sources and references citations kindly give me a hope to verifiy my new article". What I don't see is a biography of any kind. As for autobiographies, you're at the wrong website. -- Hoary (talk) 11:27, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have since been indefinitely blocked. You must succeed in appealing your block to have your account reinstated. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) FTR: Wikipedia:Sockpuppet investigations/Iwajidshaikh. --bonadea contributions talk 21:44, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Draft and article titles salted. Mjroots (talk) 11:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) "Can you plz help"[edit]  Priyanka9868 (talk) 11:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I HAVE TRIED SEVERAL TIME PUBLISHING CONTENT ON WIKIPEDIA BUT IT IS SHOWING PROMOTION CAN YOU PLZ HELP No need for capitals, Priyanka9868. Which article(s) or draft(s) are you asking about? -- Hoary (talk) 11:29, 22 November 2021 (UTC) This is the page Draft:Kapil Gupta — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868 (talk • contribs) 12:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Priyanka9868 Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about someone and their accomplishments. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about a person, showing how they meet the special Wikipedia definition of a notable person. Most of the sources in the draft seem to be interviews with the person, or simple biographical descriptions, not in depth, significant coverage of the person. Please see Your First Article. 331dot (talk) 12:14, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I quote the deleted draft: The company comes under IT Software ,Data Analytics , AI and IOT industries. At the very outset, OMLogic is not an marketing outsourcing company, but a strategic partner for your online marketing success. They offer a holistic “one-stop-shopping” solution for the internet marketing needs of clients. Within that, what does "strategic" add to "partner", what does "holistic" add to "one-stop-shopping", and why the "your" in "your online marketing success"? And Priyanka9868, you say that you have tried to publish this; but you have not. Or anyway "Priyanka9868" has not. Are you saying that you, Alex2321 and Sattu.pandey are all the same person? -- Hoary (talk) 12:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Also, are you related to Priyanka9868146? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) User:Alex2321 created the logo for CHES Special Risk that Priyanka9868146 used in Draft:CHES Special Risk. David notMD (talk) 15:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) No, we are not a same person. Actually he is one of my linkedin friend. I was not able to upload the logo of CHES Special Risk that why I have asked him to do so. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868146 (talk • contribs) 05:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Sandbox[edit] Hello is it possible to create an article if the first one you did has not yet been reviewed? how can I write on the sandbox if it only brings the draft I had done previously?Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Faith Buyaki, it is possible. Just create and use a new sandbox. You can do this by for example clicking on User:Faith Buyaki/sandbox 2 and using that. A different name is possible; just be sure that the name starts User:Faith Buyaki/. -- Hoary (talk) 13:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Biology[edit] Biologyassignments write briefly holozoic nutrition, parasitic nutrition, feeding mechanism in holozoic organisms. 105.112.176.163 (talk) 14:53, 22 November 2021 (UTC) We're not doing your coursework for you, and nor will the reference desks. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Holozoic nutrition exists as an under-referenced, Stub article. David notMD (talk) 15:40, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Help moving my draft[edit] Hi, I have created a draft, Draft:Angel Heredia, that I think is ready for review. Angel Heredia is already a Wikipedia page, so could someone with the needed rights move the draft to Draft:Angel Heredia (soccer) before I submit it for review? Thank you in advance! 73.162.91.15 (talk) 16:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you submit your draft for review and it is accepted, the reviewer will place it at the proper title. You may wish to leave a note on the draft talk page explaining the titling issue, though. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I went ahead and moved the draft (per Wikipedia:Naming conventions (sportspeople)#Association football (soccer)) to make it easier on the reviewer. DanCherek (talk) 16:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Paw partol[edit] Can someone help with gross of paw patrol the movie as acorrding to box office mojo it at $130M[1] 92.236.253.249 (talk) 17:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt11832046/  Courtesy link: PAW_Patrol:_The_Movie RudolfRed (talk) 18:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC)  Done by Clpo13. GoingBatty (talk) 05:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reaching a consensus[edit] Hello, after many failures, I have explained why my edits should be accepted. Please share your opinion on these pages: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock Centrereded (talk) 17:41, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Centrereded. Your edits create the impression that your goal on Wikipedia is to make Marcelo Claure and Hans Georg Näder look bad. Cullen328 (talk) 18:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded: Reaching a consensus on an article talk page is much more difficult if the text that's proposed is long and consists of many sections. It is very unlikely that you will get a consensus in favour of what essentially amounts to "please restore all my edits", especially since the text you proposed to add is not quite neutral in tone. You received some very good advice and explanations of how the process works here; please take some time to read that and start a discussion about which specific points you think should be added to the article. Well-sourced criticism of individuals and companies can certainly be included in Wikipedia articles, but it has to be added in a neutral manner, and considering what is due weight. --bonadea contributions talk 20:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I also have no interest in the topics, but did see many comments that proposed refernces were not considered Wikipedia reliable source, and a general sense of 'piling on' rather than neutral point of view and appropriate length. You have been hammering at these articles since at least July, with for example, an attack-toned draft Draft:Hans Georg Näder. Why this deep and persistent interest in a draft and an article about German and Bolivian businessmen, respectively? David notMD (talk) 21:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 19:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @ACtiling, List of people from Merseyside? It's not locked or anything, you can edit it. Only add people that has a WP-article, preferably with a reference that supports that they belong on that page, see WP:TUTORIAL on how to add references. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:13, 22 November 2021 (UTC) WP:ADVENTURE can also be useful as an intro to Wikipedia. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You are on the verge of being blocked from making any edits to List of people from Merseyside. At the Administrators' Incidents board: "This is a newish editor, who is solely focussed on making changes to one article - List of people from Merseyside. They probably mean well. However, I have never before come across an editor who is so unable to listen to advice on basic editing skills - for example, they appear to believe that it's only possible to add a name to the list while removing one at the same time. They have been repeatedly advised, and occasionally warned, by several editors on numerous occasions, and directed to places like WP:Teahouse, but appear to be completely unable to comprehend what makes an edit allowable, and seem unwilling to learn. I would far prefer that they were not blocked but rather improve their skills - but sheer inability to achieve a modicum of competence appears to be an unresolvable problem. Any advice?" At issue, SPECIFICALLY, is that you are removing existing names for no valid reason, then inserting new names, but not consistent with the alphabetical order of the list. Stop removing names. Being a person from the past is not a valid reason to remove a name. Do not remove names. Stop removing names. REALLY. Or be blocked from ever editing this article again. David notMD (talk) 21:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Why i cant see my name on wikipedia??[edit] I have acted in a Bollywood movie as an lead actress, why i cant see myself on Wikipedia’s page 43.248.70.167 (talk) 22:07, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you meet the Wikipedia definition of a notable actress, you might merit an article, but it is strongly advised that you not attempt to write one yourself, see autobiography policy. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps[edit] Arbitrary merge to another page. Argonne was one of the only 13 founding corps of Drum Corps International in 1972. An editor (with no drum corps background) arbitrarily merged this page into a defunt D & B page. Argonne should hold it's own page because of it's historical significance. Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Argonne73. Please stop edit warring: that is regarded as disruptive, and may get you blocked. We get that you believe that there should be a separate article about Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps; but several experienced editors have disagreed with you, and nobody (including you) has argued for its retention at WP:Articles for deletion/Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps. Wikipedia works by consensus: if you think a change should be made (or not be made) it is up to you to persuade other editors according to Wikipedia's policies. A core policy is notability: it is not enough for a subject to be "of historical significance" (or popular, important, famous, influential or several other characteristics which would contribute to notability out in the world): in Wikipedia we use the word in a special sense, which mostly comes down to "are there enough reliably published sources, wholly independent of the subject, and containing significant coverage of the subject, to base an article on?" Several editors have expressed their opinion that the existing article does not establish this. If you want the article retained it is up to you to persuade other editors that there are adequate sources to establish (which means, finding such sources) that it meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. --ColinFine (talk) 22:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) pokemon showdown[edit] how do i find pokemon showdown ifo here DMPenguin (talk) 00:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) DMPenguin (talk) there is one sentence about Pokémon Showdown in the "Fan community" section of the Pokémon article. If you are able to find good published references about Pokémon Showdown you can expand the article's coverage on that topic. Karenthewriter (talk) 00:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi DMPenguin! there's also a small section on rules used by smogon, the community(?) that hosts pokémon showdown over at Pokémon_competitive_play#Smogon if you want to check that or help over there. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:56, 23 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath[edit] Hi there - can someone help me with my inline citations / footnotes? I am putting up my first wiki page submission and have feedback to improve this area - but unsure what else i need to do to meet criteria. Feedback on my new page appreciated: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath Claire Leaf (talk) 03:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Three points. First, an index number ("<ref> ... </ref>") comes immediately after a comma, period, etc; not before it. Secondly, you can (and most drafts should) reuse references: ("<ref name="XYZ">full details</ref>" for the first instance, "<ref name="XYZ" />" for each subsequent instance, where "XYZ" is something distinctive). Thirdly, for any reference, you format a link something like this Author, "[https://www.example.com/blah.blahblah/blah.html Title of the web page]", Website, date. Retrieved date. -- Hoary (talk) 03:14, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Claire Leaf. Please read Referencing for beginners. There are many techniques for creating useful references. What they all have in common is that uninformative bare URLs are not displayed, but instead text based references are displayed, which include all of the relevant bibliographic details of the reference. Things like title, author, publication or publisher, date of publication, page numbers, ISBN numbers for books, and the like. Cullen328 (talk) 03:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I fixed some of the references, but in doing so, discovered that the draft as submitted is a close paraphrasing of reference #2: https://leafie.org/seizurerescuebreath/. Reword, so that the text is in your own word rather than sentences verbatim. As for the refs I did not fix, the above link shows how to convert URLs to valid refs. There remains one other problem that may b insurmountable. Wikipedia requires that for health articles, refs meet criteria described at WP:MEDRS. The refs you have do not appear to be sufficient, i.e., not review articles of multiple clinical trials. David notMD (talk) 03:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ?[edit]  Ayaelmelegy (talk) 04:06, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Ayaelmelegy, I took a quick look at the first of these. It has 13 references, but there's no indication of which of the 13 is a reference for which part of the draft. Additionally, each of the 13 is just a "bare URL". Please see the section immediately above for how to improve the references. -- Hoary (talk) 04:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Second one, drafts also URLs. David notMD (talk) 05:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) A Request to add Template to talk page[edit] As a new Wikipedia user, I always wondered how to add Template like example NoACEMM to a User talk. Moreno Ardan1 (talk) 3:18, 23 November 2021 FYI?– Removed duplicate signature As the message on your talk page suggests, you can just add {{NoACEMM}} to your own talk page. Templates usually belong to the top of talk pages. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:25, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is Imslp a good source to back up my information?[edit] Ok so I want to edit Dolores Paterno because it says there that the original lyrics were in Spanish and translated by Levi Celerio which is not true because the original sheet music from 1880 already had Tagalog lyrics and Levi Celerio added another version of lyrics.(since the original song was published before Levi was born) I don't know other sources but the sheet music in Imslp.com that explains this. Isangtaosamundo (talk) 08:28, 23 November 2021 (UTC) In your place, I'd (i) add {{Dubious|date=November 2021}} immediately after the sentence The lyrics were translated from Spanish into Tagalog by the Filipino National Artist Levi Celerio; and (ii) raise the matter on Talk:Dolores Paterno. In the latter, give your reasons for saying that it's not true. I'm unfamiliar with imslp.com; in its current state, I have to say that it looks like mere junk. Can you perhaps retrieve an earlier, reliable version from the Wayback Machine? If so, give the title and URL of the relevant page. Feel free to cite other reliable sources (books, journals) even if they haven't been reproduced on the web and aren't downloadable. -- Hoary (talk) 10:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism[edit] Hi, I wanted to know the precise difference between blatant and subtle vandalism. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:34, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! basically subtle vandalism is vandalism where there is an attempt to make it seem real or otherwise hide it from others, for example changing a date to "21 April" which may seem real until further inspection instead of something obviously fake such as "420 January" such as the case with blatant vandalism. other such cases are, from the page linked, are adding plausible misinformation to articles (such as minor alteration of facts or additions of plausible-sounding hoaxes), hiding vandalism (such as by making two bad edits and reverting only one), simultaneously using multiple accounts or IP addresses to vandalize, abuse of maintenance and deletion templates, or reverting legitimate edits with the intent of hindering the improvement of pages. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a bunch @Melecie. But still I want some help. Can you tell me what type of vandalism the two edits are in page Warfaze, which I reverted moments back. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) it may be one of those edits that fall in between, like if you understand bengali it would probably be visible that it's an attempt at vandalism, while if you don't it could be understood as an attempt to add something constructively to a page.  melecie  t - 10:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Yeah so the language matters. Any way that you @Melecie. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Archives vanished[edit] I went to my own Talk to archive discussions, only to see that my previously created archives have vanished. Any idea what happened? David notMD (talk) 11:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Nevermind. Tracked it down to a self-inflicted deletion of "Talk header"" months ago. David notMD (talk) 11:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Heading correction[edit] How do i correct a spelling on the heading? i added an unwanted letter on the heading and need to remove it . How do i do it.  11:19, 23 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by ChabbieCee (talk • contribs) ChabbieCee, you edit a regular heading (such as "Heading correction" for this thread) just as you edit other text. As for the titles of articles or other pages, you need to "move" a page to its new title. So if you realize that the name you want for Ms Nerwande is Elisabeth (with an "s"), you view the page User:ChabbieCee/Elizabeth Nerwande, click on the option to move it, specify User:ChabbieCee/Elisabeth Nerwande, give your reason for the move, and say (i) yes you want to move any talk page there may be (if there's no talk page, no matter), and (ii) yes there should be a redirect from the old name to the new one. -- Hoary (talk) 11:42, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search?[edit] I created a draft about a dance collective called FlucT Draft:FlucT. When I do a search for "fluct" on Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?search=fluct&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go&ns0=1, the draft doesn't show up. This concerns me because I fear someone else may start an article on FlucT not realizing there is already a draft. Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen To search for a draft, you must put "Draft:" in front of the draft title. Keep in mind that users are not under any obligation to first search for a draft if they want to directly create an article. I have added the submission template to your draft so you can submit it. 331dot (talk) 11:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) 331dot thanks, I probably understood that. I just wonder if it's a good policy, because some editors may not know they have to put draft: in front, miss my draft, create their own draft, then there seems to be a duplication of effort that feels needless? Greg Dahlen (talk) 13:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Greg Dahlen, and welcome to the Teahouse. You can always open a discussion on this sort of issue at the Village pump. But in my view there are good reasons for the way it is. The Wikipedia that the public sees is six million encyclopaedia articles: nothing else. That's all that is indexed by external search engines, and that's all that the Wikipedia search box gives you unless you tell it otherwise. All the rest - talk pages, drafts, user pages, projects pages, policies, essays, etc, are "under the bonnet", seen only by those who choose to look inside. --ColinFine (talk) 13:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Greg Dahlen: There is actually a clever feature which makes it unlikely anyone would accidentally start a second draft with exactly the same name as one that already exists. If you go through all the steps to begin a new article called "FlucT" by typing that in the search box, choosing the option to "Search for pages containing FlucT" and then clicking on the red link in the search output page where it says "You may create the page "FlucT", but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered." you'll find that the newly created page will have a big banner at the top saying "There is a draft for this article at Draft:FlucT." You can confirm this by clicking on the redlink I placed in this answer, which cuts out all the searching and will now go straight into draft creation mode when clicked. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:18, 24 November 2021 (UTC) how do i seen how many edits i have[edit] how do i see how many edits i have thanks DMPenguin (talk) 13:05, 23 November 2021 (UTC) By clicking this link. -- Hoary (talk) 13:23, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DMPenguin. Just in case you're wondering where the link that Hoary mentioned above can be found, just go to your user page in in the left-hand sidebar click on "User contributions" in the "Tools" section. Then, scroll all the way down to the very bottom of the page and click on "Edit count". That's where you'll find the aforementioned link. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:30, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I go to the little toolbar (Talk, Sandbox, Preferences, Beta, Watchlist, Contributions, Log out) that's to the left of my username, which is above any Wikipedia article I'm viewing when logged in. I click on Preferences and my number of edits is shown. That's what I see on an aging Mac laptop, when using Safari as a browser, but you may see something different on your computer. Karenthewriter (talk) 17:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) English[edit] What is a tea house? 41.114.234.36 (talk) 13:32, 23 November 2021 (UTC) On Wikipedia it is a friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia. Theroadislong (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Science[edit] How do you make a tealeaf 41.190.245.5 (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. This is intended to be a friendly place for getting help in using and editing Wikipedia: for general knowledge questions, the reference desk is a better place; or often, you can look at one of our six million articles, such as tea processing. --ColinFine (talk) 14:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Bold, Italics, or Quotes?[edit] I'm writing my first ever article from scratch, albeit I've written essays for practically empty existing articles many times before, so I know what I'm doing. One thing I'm never sure about however, is when to use bold, italics and "quotations." Although I know that "quotations" are used on songs. I'm at one of those situations now, while writing about some early appearances of a former footballer turned rapper. I'm mentioning and referencing a few of the Youtube channel's he appeared on, but as they don't have Wikipedia articles like SB.TV, Mixtape Madness, Link Up TV and GRM Daily do, I'm wondering whether I should put the channel names in bold, italics or "quotations"? Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Can I have an answer please? Danstarr69 (talk) 21:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Sorry you didn't get a reply until now. I guess all our volunteers were busy! We have a 'Manual of Style' which should help you (see WP:MOS), or visit WP:BOLD; WP:ITALICS and WP:QUOTATIONS for detailed guidance. Avoid using bold in articles anywhere except the first sentence to highlight the subject, and possible later on the first use of another term that is synonymous with the page title. Bold should definitely not be used to highlight YouTueb channel names or anything else. Use italics sparingly, for things like scientific names, and use quotation marks only when you actually quote something a person genuinely said (quote it verbatim), followed by a citation to prove that they said it in that exact form. Don't make quotations very large chunks of text, and don't insert song lyrics which will probably be copyright and be instantly removed. Does that answer you now? Nick Moyes (talk) 22:53, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I'm not sure. I've just had a quick look at the articles and the Style Manual seems to help a bit. However the Be Bold article you linked doesn't seem to mention anything about when to use Bold text. And the Italics and "Quotations" articles don't look much use either, especially as the "quotations" thing isn't what I was talking about. When you mention a song, you put the song title in quotation marks like this "Song". Basically what I'm saying is... Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a website/Youtube channel which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a film/TV show which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a music mixtape/EP/LP/album which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention relevant business which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention an award ceremony and its categories which don't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a person who doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Etc etc. Here's an example paragraph, with some of the things mentioned: John Smith collaborated with Jim Smith on the song "Wikipedia is Great." The music video for "Wikipedia is Great" was released on the Youtube channel Wikipedia TV. He then released his album titled Wikipedia: Greatest Hits which won a Wikipedia Award for Best Album. The Wikipedia Awards were broadcast on BBC One. Danstarr69 (talk) 23:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Very recently I learned about MOS:TITLEABSENTBOLD and would recommend not worrying too much about the infinite rules. I'll admit I don't have an ironclad rule for italics/quotations, but whatever decision you go with, consistency within the same article is key. Sometimes certain topics have their own writing guidelines/styles tied to a specific region/grammar set. Generally bold text guidelines are defined in MOS:BOLD, not to be confused with the philosophy of WP:BOLD EDITING. Someone else will help you if need be. Thank you for the question and happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Shushugah Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Text formatting#Italic type From reading the Italics bit in the above link, it basically looks like I should use Italics whenever I want to emphasise something in the middle of a sentence, unless it's a song of course, as I already know that those are highlighted with "quotation marks." Danstarr69 (talk) 00:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Indeed! A fourth scenario that wasn't mentioned. Whether a tangentially related Article exists or doesn't exist, has no impact on whether it should be boldened/italicized or quoted. You may decide depending on its usefulness make a WP:BLUELINK for existing articles, and a WP:REDLINK for non existing articles that have strong potential to become one. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 00:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Visual Editing[edit] Hi, can anybody out here tell me how I can visually edit a table, as in this page. I could figure out how I can add a new row below a specific row, but could not figure out how to change the sl. no of all the following rows, after adding a new row. I could now answer the edit request on that talk page, not only because I could not do it, but because the edit request had not provided relevant details. Anyway, can anyone please tell me the procedure of doing it. For example, consider the following. I want to add a new row after 7th row. And add new details. So what is the procedure, using visual editing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible It's a two step process, involving both Visual Editor and Source Editor. I have copied the source code from the article into my Sandbox as it's too risky playing around with tables directly - and especially as this is just a demo. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 (Note that my edit summary links to the source page where the authors are credited - do this even in your sandbox please, as we need to credit other people's work when we upload it, as it isn't really ours to claim as our own) You'll see I have added my very own, well-known and highly-popular YouTube Channel to a newly inserted row at position 8. You should do that bit most easily in Visual Editor by Selecting Row 7, clicking the Chevron button that appears on the far left of the table and selecting Insert below. Now type in all the information/data that you can, obviously numbering this as Row 8. Ignore the fact that text is not aligned, you'll fix that in the next step. Now save your edits (Publish Changes) then go back in, but via Edit Source so that you're editing the wikimarkup.Do not use VE. Find the row with the newly added data. (Tip: use Ctrl-F to search for my surname, so you're taken straight there.) Find the line containing the position number '8' that you added. It will look likethis: |8 Copy and paste the style command from an existing centred cell and paste it in so it looks like this: | style="text-align:center" |8 Preview it to check it's centred, and repeat elsewhere as necessary. For flags and so forth, find an exisiting row contining what you need and paste that in to the empty cell (also within Source Editor, not in VE) Finally, you will now have to manually edit every subsequent row so that the row number shifts up one to accommodate the newly-inserted row. (You cannot do this automatically as you might using Excel.) It should take you just a few minutes to fix this. I stopped at fixing this at row 20, which is why there are two rows numbered 20 in my demo. Again, don't use VE for this step. Please visit this Help page to appreciate what you can do in Visual Editor and all its limitations. You can't, for example, change colours with VE - you must use source editor. The 1st line of that section I linked to mentions a 'Phabricator' list of tasks to improve VE. Follow it to appreciate what can and can't yet be done. See https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T108245 Whilst you might be frustrated that you can't do everything in Visual Editor, just remember that this tool was devised to make basic editing simpler and more WYSIWYG for beginners. Experienced editors generally tend to avoid Visual Editor and prefer using Source Editor. You are now asking about very complex editing, where either only Source Editor or a combination of both editing tools will be necessary. I hope this all makes sense. Please ping me know when you've done with the stuff in my Sandbox, and I'll then delete the content from it. Nick Moyes (talk) 16:49, 23 November 2021 (UTC) PS: Another little tip for you: Enter as much data as you can in VE. If you can't add what you want, leave some placeholder text like aaaa bbbb ccccc etc in its place. This make it much, much easier to find the right cell to edit late in Source Editor/wikimarkup. Cheers, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:54, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I really don't have words to thank you man. You just helped me beyond imagination. I really did not imagine, you would use your precious time in writing so much for me. I read this page. But could not find any help. But see, you gave me the the necessary page, which has the right information. But I could not find it myself - so foolish. I just sometimes tend to wonder, how some Wikipedians, know about every help page in Wikipedia, and have explored every nook and corner of Wikipedia. They know the exact help pages, for the exact problem, and they know which help page has that needed information. For example see, the page that I was looking into, and the page that you gave me. Such a difference. I thought I might get help from the Visual Editor help page, but you gave me the actual page which has the information that I need, the Help:Table page, under the VE section. Although both the pages may seem to have the same kind of information, but it is a huge difference. And see you also left me a PS: and gave me your great tip. Yes, in that way, it is really easy to find out. Thank you again for helping me learn Wikipedia, and with all the elder Wikipedians' kind help, I am learning so fast. Thanks again. Have a nice Wikipedia career. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes But I cannot figure out one thing, while writing the name of the channel I wrote Itcouldbepossible, but wikipedia is thinking it to be a page, and in the preview section, I see that it is writing like [1], which it thinks to be a link, for further reference you can see that in your sandbox. While yours is not looking like mine. Can you figure out and tell me what is wrong with me. I am always getting confused. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:03, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible The only think "wrong with you" is your wonderful fascination in some of the minutae of Wikipedia. Nerdiness is an asset here, as is a desire to ask questions and to learn. I only hope you then put what you're learning into practice. That's why I was willing to spend time answering someone's technical questions (even though I'm no expert on tables at all - or indeed much else, if I think about it!) The best way to learn from one's errors is first to accept that one must have made a mistake, and then to keep analysing the problem until you suddenly go ahah! that's my mistake. You never forget those types of mistakes, and that's how we learn through life. Although not normally encouraged, I give you permission to go into that section of my sandbox and make an edit there to show me the problem you're encountering. I'm not 100% sure what you're seeing. My link was actually a wikilink to the Teahouse, modified to display my name. (In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity, but might not on yours. A red link is to a page that doesn't exist, whether it's an article page, a user page or something else. The link you've just pasted above was to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/En.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible If you had put it as an external link (using one square bracket), it would look like this: [2] Both would not work becaue you accidentally repeated the en.wikipedia.org elements. You actually needed https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible as an external link, though that would not be appropriate for a table. This also works: Itcouldbepossible - I forced the User: bit to not display by putting a vertical pipe character at the end. Now I think you asked somewhere else about how we learn all this stuff. Watching, reading, doing and making mistakes. It's taken me 10 years of editing to pick up the stuff I'm now happy to share with you, but I was quite able to do most of the basic editing (apart from tables - they're really scary!) after quite a short time. I worry a bit that you're wanting to "run before you can walk", but I hope I've now managed to answer all your various questions. Good luck! Nick Moyes (talk) 11:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes, you are answering all my questions to my content. And you were saying about putting into use what I am learning. Yes, I am doing that. For example when I copied the table from your sandbox to my new tables sandbox, I wrote from whom I have copied the table. What I am wanting to say is that for example I want a wiki link to my talk page, which would show up like "Itcouldbepossible", using the vertical pipe (|) character. Then why cannot I do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very simple. [[User talk:Itcouldbepossible|Itcouldbepossible]] renders as Itcouldbepossible. For help on wikilinks, see Help:Wikilinks. --David Biddulph (talk) 12:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks, that was what I was wanting to do from the beginning. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible If you edit the source to this thread and look at my reply above, you should see exactly how I did it. The alternative is still to use the vertical pipe after your username, but to add different text (either your own name without the User: bit) or as I did when linking you to Albert Einstein! You'll work it out. Nick Moyes (talk) 12:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thank you, I wanted to tell you this from the very beginning. But you could not understand it, anyway, thank you for all the other help that you provided. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Also I want to know how I can turn by wiki redirects to green as you said here - In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:26, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Is it possible to mask external links to read the way I want. I mean Wiki links can be renamed as the editor wishes, is there any way in which external links can be masked, or is it at all possible? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating a page ethically[edit] Creating a page for my boss My boss is adamant that she wants a Wikipedia account (she's a prominent science communication researcher). I think she probably deserves one, but I'm also deeply aware that I'm biased as a prospective page author. Does anyone have any advice for me? I want to make my boss happy, but not by violating Wikipedia guidelines. Lorikie (talk) 14:26, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: You'll need to read and abide by Wikipedia:Conflict of interest. DuncanHill (talk) 14:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lorikie, and welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for being up-front about your situation. Unfortunately, there are some formidable obstacles in the way of you being able to satisfy your boss. As Duncan says, you need to read up about conflict of interest, and further, you need to make the formal declarations that you are a paid editor (it doesn't matter if you are specifically paid to do this, from what you say it is part of your job). Next, you need to drop the idea of "deserving a page", because that assumes that a Wikipedia article is in any way for the benefit of its subject. Of course many people (and other entities) do get some benefit frrom there being a Wikipedia article about them, but that is incidental: Wikipedia has no such purpose, and indeed is indifferent as to whether the subject wants an article about them or does not want an article about them. An article about your boss will not belong to her, will not be under her control, will not necessarily say what she wants it to say, and should be based almost entirely on what people wholly unconnected with her have chosen to publish about her (good or bad!) and not on what she or her associates say or want to say. You might like to show her an article about yourself isn't necessarily a good thing. The counterpart of "deserve" that Wikipedia actually uses is, "does the subject meet Wikipedia's criteria for notability? This is not directly related to prominence, importance, influence, popularity, or any of the other things that you might normally connect with "notability": in essence it is a question of whether there are enough reliably published sources, wholly unconnected with the subject to base an article on. If you and she decide that you still want there to be an article, there are more hurdles. Creating a new article is much more difficult than it looks - I liken it to building a house as your first building project, or playing a public recital after your first violin lesson, and always advise new editors to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" and how Wikipedia works. Editors who do not heed this advice often have a frustrating time as they put in a lot of work and don't understand why their house keeps falling down. Having a conflict of interest you will likely find it even harder, as you will need to basically forget everything you know about your boss, and summarise only what those independent commentators have published. If you decide to go ahead, you need to read your first article, and then use the articles for creation process to create a draft. --ColinFine (talk) 14:57, 23 November 2021 (UTC) If pressed to proceed by your boss, see if there are three or more published articles about her - content at length, not just a name-mention - and then use guidance at Help:Referencing for beginners to create references in proper ref format in your Sandbox. If you cannot find publications about her, then the effort is futile. David notMD (talk) 15:52, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: Is your boss by any chance Laura Lindenfield? If so, I think that you will have a very difficult time finding the sources you'll need for a draft article on a living person in which each and every statement has to have a reliable reference. When I Google her name, I get a number of sources but they are virtually all based on interviews (or are on websites clearly linked to her), so are not WP:INDEPENDENT. The nearest I can find that might be OK is this one at science.org which probably reaches the WP:SIGCOV for notability (specifically in her case WP:NACADEMIC) but still seems, by using language like "She is passionate about...", to take a tone that Wikipedia would not use (see WP:NPOV). Your best bet, I think, is to draft a very short article using such independent sources and then not be too disappointed if the Draft is declined: that will at least prove you have tried! Make sure you start by complying with the mandatory disclosures described at WP:PAID. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Text Allignment[edit] Any idea on text alignment in table. I want to center align some text in tables, using visual editor. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:44, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible I think you'd probably need to use wikisource code for that, using the "text-align:center; parameter. PS: I've tweaked the demo warning you placed on your sandbox page as you'd left the nowiki commands in which stop it from working. So the warning now looks like it's come from me, but obviously isn't a real vandalism warning. The best way to leave warnings is to enable WP:TWINKLE in your Preferences. Then it does it automatically for you via menu options, plus a whole lot more. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thanks for the edit. I know it is not a real vandalism warning. It is just my sandbox. If I had done something wrong, then you would have told me in the talk page. But anyway to get to the point, I have already TWINKLE enabled. I used it to start delete discussions, and got myself blocked for being thought to be a sockpuppet, since that page was created by another sock, and the sock with whom the checkusers thought me to be linked had edit warred with the previous sock. Anyway thats not the point. What you are saying is that it will give me warnings. Can you specify what warning, or what type of warnings??? Also it would be really kind of you, if you could tell me in a more precise way of how to use wikisource code, suddenly while I am writing in normal language. For example I am using "text-align:center" here, but nothing is happening. Please tell me the way, to center text in a table while using visual or source editor. Thanks for the answer, and regards. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible As I replied to you on my sandbox, it's important that you are editing tables and complex entries in WP:Source Editor not Visual Editor. Did you follow my instructions on how to switch between them, and did it work? You will get nowhere with anything other than the simplest of tables if you stick to VE. The parameter I mentioned above is wiki markup - as written with Source Editor. So, go to the table I put in my sandbox for you at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 Click 'Edit Source' next to the heading to open the section in Source Editor. (Tell me if that function is not showing, as it means you've not forced it to display via your personal Preferences setting. My default is for it to offer me both editing tools all the time - it should be yours, too, especially if you're working on tables.) Search for the word 'center' and you'll see 101 examples - one controlling each cell of data. Regarding WP:TWINKLE: Go to your own userpage. Use the drop down menu box marked 'TW' to access the Twinkle menu. The first sub-item is WARN. This opens a menu box for you to explore the various options. Try leaving yourself a first level warning against vandalism, then a second, and then a third. I can't explain all the options here for you - we expect editors to very carefully' learn for themselves how to use these powerful tools (which can easily upset other users). So read the TWINKLE page and the accompanying Documentation to understand what it can do. But it covers most of the common issues of edit waring, content removal, addition of uncited content, harassment, conflict of interest, spamming, plus single issue notices like encouragement to use edit summaries, biting newcomers, etc etc. There is a complete list of warning templates (here). Nick Moyes (talk) 10:33, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes the edit source function is showing. Also I thought that you were telling me of editing error warnings, so I asked what type of warnings. I had pasted that warning in my sandbox just to see how it looks. I knew how to use twinkle. For the table related thing, I want to know where should I place "text-align:center; parameter? I have made my edit on your sandbox. You can see that, and tell me if it is right or wrong. You will see that the table I created, it has some errors. For the channel name column I thought of adding my talk page and then renaming the wiki link as "Itcouldbepossible". But it showed up like this: ([3]) - why??? While your wiki link it redirects it to the teahouse it shows Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel? How come??? Why cannot I edit my wiki link to show my username, while on clicking it redirects to my talk page. For example yours show Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel and it redirects to WP:TH Why is mine not like that?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 11:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Tables[edit] Today I was editing random articles, when I came across Nach Baliye. I was reading the article, trying to find for any errors, when I came across this table [4]. I just sort of went mad seeing this table. Just a well formatted and advanced table, with all the color schemes, and just nice cell merging. Can anyone, for heaven's sake tell me how that table was created with all those attractive features. I don't really think that the Wiki markup was typed out. There must be some modern graphical interface, for doing such a tedious thing. I want to know how that table was created. I would really be glad, if I get the answer from someone who is an expert in this matter, and has been editing Wikipedia for a couple of years, because, I want the exact and precise method of creating such a table. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:58, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I've been editing for over 10 years and wouldn't dare to create such a thing. I have, however, created very long data tables by starting in Excel, getting all the sorting, the text and the wikilinks and in the right places before exporting it with a tool to Wikimarkup. But I'm not aware of a tool to make tables look pretty like that - so I shall await for answers from other users more experienced in such things, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: It takes work, often over time with improvements by different editors, often starting with copying the format from another page. The first similar table in the article was added by an IP here with edit summary "added table like other shows Jhalak". That may refer to Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart or an earlier season. It could maybe be tracked further back but I haven't tried. Help:Table has general help but it's complicated. Much of it is the same or similar as HTML tables which some editors already know. PrimeHunter (talk) 16:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @PrimeHunter Yes, but how did that specific table appear in Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart. How was it created??? And also I wanted to know one thing, how on Earth did you find that specific page history, when the table was added?? I have seen many people doing so. Is their anyway of finding out when a specific edit was first made, and the what edits followed?? I really don't think that you flicked through the page history. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible There are various ways to find when an edit was first made. The slow way is to look at 500 edits in View History at a time. Let's assume that covers the entire history (if not, just increase the number to 5000 in the url bar), then you can find a rough midway point, click (and note down) the date you clicked. Is the edit showing there? IF yes, go down and divide the lower half of edits into half again, and select another date to click. Is the edit there? If 'No', then it will have been made between those two date points. Divide the edits roughly in half again and then again until you find the first one where that edit was made. Doing this in conjunction with looking at View History (green numbers are positive count of bytes added/red are negative overall additions) makes this just a few minutes work. It took me just a few moments to do that for Nach Baliye, speeded up by using Ctrl-F to search for 'Scoring Chart', of which there were 823 mentions in the edit summaries. I went to the lowest one, then scrolled down a dozen or so edits further and found a massive addition by an IP on 9 March 2019 with a very helpful edit summary. Job done. Of course, that's the slow way. For simplest way to find when a short text string was first added to an article is to copy it, then go to the View History tab. Just above all the row entries, click Find addition/removal to use the 'WikiBlame' tool. Be aware that by default it only searches 500 of the latest edits before the date selected. So it will miss the first addition of text if it's a very heavily edited page as this one is unless you spend time to understand how to take advantage of the tool's searching features. I wouldn't use it to search for a chart being added, but I might focus on just one unique element or keyword in that chart. Hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks, I learnt a new thing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 10:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the answer. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Prime Healthcare[edit] My interest in CAlifornia health systems drew me to Prime Healthcare, where I was struck by the difference in how Wiki editors handle the material. Whereas large systems such as Sutter and Kaiser are given the opportunity to list history, background, hospital names, etc, Prime's editing history is aggressive and heavy handed. The result is a page listing controversy and nothing else. Prime owns 45 hospitals nationwide, employs 50000 people, but you wouldn't know it by Wiki. BTW I am in no way affiliated or compensated by Prime; my research is for a graduate program. I'm just amazed at the discrepancy and poor treatment. I haven't researched it enough to determine whether sources should be improved on deleted materials, but that is different than what edit history shows. Any attempts to improve the page are immediately deleted wholesale, in apparent violation of Wiki editing rules. (I attempted to undo some edits myself) Can anyone explain this? Prime owner Prem Reddy has made a number of enemies with his handling of labor, etc. Is that at play here? Archie515 (talk) 16:46, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Prime Healthcare Services Karenthewriter (talk) 17:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Archie515. Welcome to the Teahouse! You can discuss the issue about the content of the article on the article's talk page. The concerned editors might engage in the conversation and help you in finding a possible solution. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 17:24, 23 November 2021 (UTC) thanks but page monitors refuse to allow access and have not responded to talk page requests in the past. Now locked out from making any changes to sources. Page is an embarrassment to all Wiki contributors. Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC)Archie515Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The Controversy section is well supported by reliable published sources. It's Prime Healthcare that should be embarrassed. Maproom (talk) 23:04, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Archie515: I see you posted twice at Talk:Prime Healthcare Services. The last piece of advice you were given there was to make a specific request. I suggest you think about the worst problem with the article, and then post a specific detailed suggestion on the talk page, such as: Please change the current article text "_____________" to "_____________" based on the independent reliable source found at ___________________. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Disambiguation-links tag on redirects[edit] In this edit I intentionally changed a redirect from targeting an article to targeting a disambiguation page. To my surprise, the "adding disambiguation links" tag was added. In a way, it makes sense (I added a link to a disambiguation page), but on the other hand, the tag is probably meant for when someone adds a link in an article without knowing it's a disambiguation page, like if I added a link to Georgia or Mercury in an article. Can something be changed so that this tagging isn't activated when the end result of the edit is a redirect? I reported this at WP:EF/FP but was sent here for a reason I don't understand: the responding editor said both that the tag isn't activated and that it's working properly. 72.77.45.188 (talk) 17:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The edit filter (which interdicts edits) is separate from the tagging system (which describes what an edit is). —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 17:38, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Do anyone think like that?[edit] Are there people actually thinking that this page represents a universal and unbiased point of view? Owerthise (talk) 18:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I think like that. It doesn't seem biased to me. What direction do you think it's biased in? Maproom (talk) 18:43, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think there is such a thing as an universal point of view, certainly not about a topic connected to religion. It looks neutral to me; it may not be perfect (no article is) but there are no obvious problems. --bonadea contributions talk 19:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Owerthise: Welcome to the Teahouse! If you have a specific suggestion to improve the article, please post it on Talk:Muhammad with a reliable source and the {{edit extended-protected}} template, and another editor will review your request. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Help with revision[edit] Hello! I'm trying to revise the first two paragraphs of the Cultural context section of Cueva de las Manos and I need help with it. I've already put in a copy edit request for the whole page with the Guild of Copyeditors, but I was wondering if there was a group/person willing to help with this particular section in the meantime. I'm trying to revise the section in accordance with the following advice of FunkMonk in the talk page: There is some repetition in how you describe the paintings were returned to and were influential for the people throughout many thousands of years, perhaps check if someone of it can be consolidated or made less similar. If anyone would be willing to lend a hand in this respect it would be much appreciated. If there is a better place to ask for such help, I would be grateful if someone could point me there. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Best, Tyrone Madera (talk) 18:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) This might be better for the Talk Page, but one possible way to consolidate this might be to write this instead, which combines two separate statements: However, that so many people contributed to the artwork for thousands of years suggests the cave held great significance for the artists, with earlier groups influencing later ones through a continuous narrative, playing out over millennia. But that's just one possibility. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 18:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing this Ayaelmelegy (talk) 22:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Ayaelmelegy, and welcome to the Teahouse. I'm afraid there is quite a lot you need to do before that draft is publishable. The things that caught my attention are: Remove all the links to interviews. There are restrictions on the use of External links in articles, and in any case Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. Format all the references so that a reviewer can readily evaluate which of them are likely to be most reliable and independent. See REFB, and WP:NONENG. With you anonymous URLs it is hard to see whether your draft establishes that she meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. Remove all the evaluative language. No article should ever describe anything in Wikipedia's voice as "one of the most important" or "much needed". I get that you strongly approve of Hamdy's work, but none of that must come out in the article: it must be a neutral summary of what the independent sources say about her - and if there is criticism, then you should probably summarise that too. (You can quote a source that described something as "important" or "much needed" but you need to make sure that it is a source which is wholly unconnected with the subject). Please also see WP:NOTSOAPBOX. --ColinFine (talk) 23:12, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I did some edits would you please check them? Thank you — Preceding unsigned comment added by Ayaelmelegy (talk • contribs) 00:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) new wikipedia page[edit]  2600:1700:9C80:62E0:89ED:2A1E:FE48:ACD3 (talk) 22:08, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome. If you want to create a new article(not a page), that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content. If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Unregistered users(as well as new accounts) cannot directly create new articles. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) What do you do on this page[edit]  Jenay Ava (talk) 22:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Jenay Ava Welcome to the Teahouse. What we do is welcome new users and assist them with any problems they may encounter whilst editing Wikipedia. We recognise that it can be a steep learning curve to begin with, so we try to make that journey a little smoother for you in the hope that you will stick around and become one of our many regular contributors. Unfortunately, looking at your very first few contributions, I fear you think Wikipedia talk pages might be like a chat forum. They are not, and all we do here is help build the worlds greatest online encyclopaedia, and use the talk pages to assist us in that task. You'd be most welcome to help with this undertaking (6.2 million+ article in English so far), but this place is not a social media chat site. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:40, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Help writing a page[edit] I have the page written and now need to post to wikipedia, I have akk the references. Please help, FletcherEmma (talk) 23:37, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @FletcherEmma welcome to Tea House!. If you want to create a new article, that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content.If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. I have been editing the errors on Draft:Gehad Hamdy for while. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing? Thank you. Ayaelmelegy (talk) 00:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, some things need to be improved: (1) the article must have a lead portion (the introduction should not have a heading), (2) there should not be no links or Arabic letters in section headings, (3) there is too much text in the infobox, and Arabic text isn't needed there. There are other things, but you can start with this. Regards. — Alalch Emis (talk) 00:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) STATUS: Draft nominated for Speedy deletion and creating editor blocked as suspected sock (denies). David notMD (talk) 01:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have overhauled (Major Cleanup) the article (This specifically). Jairus is doing... ?? 02:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ayaelmelegy: Draft:Gehad Hamdy has no references in the "Biography" and "Speak Up" sections. Please add more independent reliable sources to your draft before submitting for AfC. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 06:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) GoingBatty, "Ayaelmelegy" got an indefinite block six hours before your last (and of course well-intentioned) message. -- Hoary (talk) 12:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Ongoing Events Section[edit] What happened with the ongoing events section on both the desktop website and the mobile website? It used to be a nicely categorized, bulleted set of news. But not it's just hyperlinks to specific wikipedia pages. I would use the previous style daily, it was a wonderful source for news. I wonder if there is a good reason for removing it, or if it was potentially even an oversight. Regardless I loved that feature and don't want to lose it :( 47.229.202.202 (talk) 01:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Are you confusing Portal:Current events/Sidebar and Portal:Current events? Both are linked from "In the news" on Main Page, on "Ongoing" and "Other recent events". PrimeHunter (talk) 02:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Rv tags[edit] Hello. Is it possible to remove tags? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Possibly - which tags were you considering removing, and why? GoingBatty (talk) 06:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty, no, I've no reason, I've seen some users who edit without any tags. So I asked. Can the tags be removed without any reason? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: When tags are removed from an article, it's assumed that the problems they highlight have been resolved. If an editor feels that a tag was removed prematurely, they'll add it back at their own discretion. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Tenryuu, I didn't tell about the tags of article. I told about editing tags such as "2017 wikitext editor". Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 07:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: There is a difference between Wikipedia:Tags and Wikipedia:Templates I see you removed the {{under construction}} template from the Carlos Moguel Jr. article in this edit, but you cannot remove the tag "2017 wikitext editor" from the edit. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 07:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Those are not removable. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reftoolbar[edit] How to change the date format for Reftoolbar? from Dmy to mdy. Thanks. —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Welcome to the Teahouse! It appears that there is a discussion about this at Wikipedia talk:RefToolbar#Date formats. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) User level[edit] Hi, I wanted to know how I can add a user level. I mean there will be a bar on my user page, and it will fill up as I edit articles. And beside it would be written, my next user level. Any idea on how to do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Here's a workaround, Itcouldbepossible. Just edit articles, constructively. Soon you will be "extended confirmed". Most people are, and few people will be surprised or much interested to know that you are. There are some other very minor superpowers that you can acquire; but again, few people will be interested. Some superpowers are a bit out of the ordinary, and you might want to advertise one or other of these; on the other hand, advertising them may seem somewhat vulgar. Best is to aim to be an article-improving Clark Kent. -- Hoary (talk) 11:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible Welcome to Tea House! As @Itcouldbepossible stated, it's rarely of interest to anyone else. This essay on WP:HATCOLLECTING could be useful on the mostly harms/some benefits of gamifying your user page with statistics. I do indulge myself with Wikipedia:Service awards as a way of marking specific tiers of editing. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 12:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Dead Links[edit] I see that many pages have something called 'dead links'. What are these so called 'dead links', and how can I make them alive again?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) For information about dead links, read WP:Dead links. --David Biddulph (talk) 09:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks again for the answer Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Add (journalist) to title[edit] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anshuman_Tiwari Can you write this in brackets as journalist because it is journalist? You can write Journalist in back of their name in brackets. Coolblack4 (talk) 10:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Coolblack4, and welcome to the Teahouse. We use a term in parenthesis like that in an article title only when it is necessary to distinguish between different people (or other subjects) with the same name. See WP:Disambiguation. --ColinFine (talk) 11:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Something drastic certainly should be done to this article. Sample: In digital journalism, he has created and successfully established an innovative and exclusive multilingual digital first content vertical moneybhaskar.com for Danik Bhaskar Group, DB Corp. It is the largest Hindi business portal and offers guidance, utility and wisdom based jargon free economic-business and investment content to aspiring readers in Hindi. (For one thing, I wonder what is being excluded.) -- Hoary (talk) 12:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Distracting AFC submission templates[edit] Does anyone know how to collapse or get the "this topic is not notable" AFC submission templates out of the way? I'm trying to work on a draft article, and they're distracting and take up about half of the page. wizzito | say hello! 12:43, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Those templates were put there for the benefit of reviewers, and of anyone who might want to work on improving the draft. You should not remove or collapse them. That's why they all say "Do not remove this line!" Maproom (talk) 13:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thing is, they are INCREDIBLY distracting to look at, I at least want to move them to the bottom at the page if I can't collapse or make them invisible. I just can't have them taking up 90% of the page from the top, it bothers me a lot and prevents me from working. wizzito | say hello! 13:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Reality shifting has been Declined three times and Rejected twice. I have restored the Declined and Rejection and Comments to the top of the article, where those belong. David notMD (talk) 14:23, 24 November 2021 (UTC) If you believe you can rescue this with better references, do so, but be aware that Rejected drafts are likely to be deleted and 'salted.' Make sure you have an off-Wikipedia copy. And understand that 'salted' means that an Administrator's approval would be needed to try again to create a draft on this topic. David notMD (talk) 14:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there seriously no way to get these to the bottom of the page (where they are still visible) or make them look less distracting? Your comments aren't helping me, sorry. Also, I am still working on the article; I had to rewrite it from scratch because the original user who created the draft made it look very bad and had bad formatting and grammar. (Also, they kept resubmitting it multiple times despite not addressing the concerns, I haven't submitted it yet.) It isn't anything speedy deletable (see Wikipedia:Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity), there's a Washington Post report and a scholarly article on the subject, but probably just needs to be worked on and more RS might need to be made before it gets published. wizzito | say hello! 14:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Declines and Rejections are considered a required part of draft history, so that the next reviewer can check if the weaknesses identified by previous reviewers have been addressed. Given that you have taken over a draft created and edited by other editors, you can leave a Comment to that effect with the other Comments. David notMD (talk) 14:39, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there no way to at least move it to a part of the page where it's visible by people contributing and reviewers, but not as distracting as a glob that takes up the first part of the page? If not, I may just have to move it to my userspace and work on it from there. wizzito | say hello! 14:42, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David notMD noting for the record I have reverted you; @Wizzito offers up a convincing reason why they moved them down, because it was distracting for them, and as long as they move them back up before resubmitting I see no issue with that move. That is ignoring the question whether or not these templates are relevant at all considering the rewrite currently ongoing, although it appears that at least some of the original text still exists. -- Asartea Talk | Contribs 15:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have added a Comment that you are in the process of completely revising the draft. Do as much as you can before submitting. I know nothing about the topic, but will mention that as it stand now, the lead is over-referenced. Pick at most three refs to support the Lead. Those refs and the others may be used in the body of the article, as more detail on history, reception, criticism, etc. is added. David notMD (talk) 14:47, 24 November 2021 (UTC) That's because I was working on it, putting the references in so I can use them later, and then delete the ref in the lead when I've finished reviewing the source and using it to source statements. You act like a draft should have the same standards as mainspace, and besides, I moved it to userspace anyways so I can work on it. wizzito | say hello! 14:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You didn't move it, you copied & pasted the content, so please read about copying within Wikipedia. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I want to pitch in from an outside editor. 5 declined templates, 2 separate comments, and 1 draft template? I know if I was unaware of all Wikipedia policies, this would feel very WP:BITEy to me. Is there not a better solution, in the form of an {{articlehistory}} style template? I understand why the need for all the notices (for future reviewers to know at a glance), but there can be so many better ways to do this now. --JackFromWisconsin (talk | contribs) 14:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I feel like a lot of people in this thread are being BITEy too... wizzito | say hello! 15:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My intention was to proffer advice on how to create a draft that is more likely to be accepted. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I understand, but I feel as if my questions weren't answered and were just met with a "don't do this" or "don't do that" and reverts. wizzito | say hello! 15:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Tendentious editing[edit] This is not marked as an essay. This is also not marked with the green symbol for policy, guidelines pages. So, how important are these types of guideline pages? Knight Skywalker (talk) 12:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very important. It's a supplementary explantion to the guideline WP:DE, and carries the same status. Mjroots (talk) 13:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Mjroots: If this is very important, then why Wikipedia is not including the green symbol in the box? --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I didn't use the bold format, but still the above lines are showing as in bold to me. --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You used the bold format by putting a semi-colon before the colon at the start of the line. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I've fixed the bold. Mjroots (talk) 16:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) This page is not one of Wikipedia's policies or guidelines, as it has not been thoroughly vetted by the community. Also it has category. Wikipedia essays (?) (±) Knight Skywalker (talk) 17:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Markup[edit] Is there any introduction page, or help page, or user guide page for Wikipedia Markup. If there is then please provide me. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Itcouldbepossible, you may be looking for Help:Wikitext. DanCherek (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks for the Wiki Help page, I am surely going to read it. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Page[edit] As you see now, my talk page has become a little clumsy. What is the way to make it clean? Should I archive them or is there any other option? Seeking for options. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: While you're allowed to delete conversations from your own talk page, archiving is recommended because it makes it more convenient for you and other editors to find those old conversations in the future. There are a few different ways to archive a talk page – you can do it manually or have a bot help you – and there is more information about each of those at Help:Archiving a talk page. DanCherek (talk) 14:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek I have archived the archival messages left by a bot on my talk page and have shifted them here. But I cannot move the three notification to three different headings, it is coming under a single heading. Please can you help me in that respect. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The first section starts with {| so you need to end it with |}. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Newcomers[edit] How, can I find all newcomers on Wikipedia??? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:08, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: You can find them at Special:Log/newusers but for what purpose ? 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA (talk) 15:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) IP blocking for 31 hours[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… I hope you don’t mind me asking this question: When administrators impose a block on IP addresses for the first time, the length of the block is usually 31 hours (1 day, 7 hours). Do you have any idea why administrators chose this value? Thanks. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 15:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC). It's so that they don't just wait 24 and return to the same things. 31h is also a standard length in the blocking dropdown menu and has been since before I was an admin. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Imagine a kid messing around in study hall, causing a school's IP to be blocked. A 24-hour block would allow him or her to come back the next day during the same period to cause more trouble. Deor (talk) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Amkgp is Sock editing[edit] Hi, first I was blocked on the ground of thinking to be a sockpuppet, and the sockpuppet investigation was raised by an ipv6 ip 2402:3A80:6E1:9A2E:A110:65A0:5AD7:4F15. The sock investigation page is here. In the Clerk, CheckUser, and/or patrolling admin comments section Blablubbs commented and said The filer is obviously Amkgp loutsocking. I blocked them for a bit. Then after the block expired then again another comment was added by ipv6 user 2402:3A80:1A4E:9197:C5B8:CED1:C0FD:9A1D, and then blablubbs blocked the ipv6 again. When it was proved that I am not a sockpuppet, this ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:A17E:9C61:AA1F:59E2:32A2 came and added welcomed me. Till date, I could not understand anything, why an ipv6 was coming an leaving me messages on my talk page. Today again an ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA came and gave me a vandalism warning on an edit that I made two articles namely, Piet van der Sluijs and Dré Saris, where I had only added a more reference needted tag using twinkle. It was my mistake or not is a far matter, but then he leaves me another link to learn wikipedia in under an hour link. He also answers one of my questions in the teahouse. The thing is all these ipv6 start with 2402:3A80, and blablubbs has stated previously that it is block evasion of sock amkgp. Now what is to be done? Should I raise a sockpuppet investigation request?? Would it be possible to block just huge range ipv6s? Please give me suggestion in this matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 16:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Also in there sockpuppet investigation page [[5]] we can see that the suspected sock puppets ipv6 also starts with 2402:3A80. We can also see that he got blocked because he used to edit logged out for a couple of time, and he was blocked for that reason. And also in a further section we see that he also used or uses 2409:4061::/36 this ipv6 range. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Itcouldbepossible (talk • contribs) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Article Not Published - not adequate sources[edit] Hi, I am trying to publish an article about a triceratops skull nicknamed 'Dragon King' which was sold last year which is the biggest skull ever found, but the article was rejected due to a lack of sources. The sale was private so there wasn't a lot of press generated, but what there was is referenced. The skull is definitely the biggest in the world. How would I go about validating that? Would an image of the skull with dimensions count? What could I use to validate it. Any suggestions would be very welcome. I should make clear that I have no financial stake in this at all, it is simply a fact that the skull is the biggest found and I think should be public information. Maudjohnson90 (talk) 16:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Maudjohnson90 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Wikipedia articles summarize what publicly available independent reliable sources say about a topic. If a topic is not sufficiently covered in such sources, it cannot be on Wikipedia. Documents in private hands or otherwise not available to the public cannot be used as sources here. Did no sources cover this sale, or its discovery? If some did, but not enough for a standalone article, there may be an existing article this could be mentioned in. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Shouldn't you first put any reliable information at Triceratops#Size, Maudjohnson90? That's a pretty well-watched article and if you think that particular skull needs another full article, you could discuss that on the Talk Page at Talk:Triceratops Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:59, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks Mike Turnbull! I have added information under Triceratops#Skull and that has remained since I added it. I'll discuss on the Talk Page as suggested. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Maudjohnson90 (talk • contribs) 17:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Final Publish[edit] Hello Sir, how much time does it take for the draft to get finally published ? Thank you. Johnalphanso (talk) 17:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You have not created nor submitted a draft to Articles for Creation. Is there a particular draft you are interested in? — Preceding unsigned comment added by David notMD (talk • contribs) 18:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Johnalphanso, and welcome to the Teahouse. There is no simple answer to your quewstion: a draft takes as long to be published as it takes. There is no queue, no schedule, no deadline: all editors are volunteers, and work on what they choose when they choose. If you're talking about Draft:Sanskar Desai, that will not get reviewed until it is submitted for review (add {{subst:AFC/draft}} to the top). But it will not get accepted until somebody follows Theroadislong's advice in the comment and removes all the unreliable sources from the list. It will likely not get accepted until somebody reformats the references from a useless list of URLs to a meaningful set of citations - see CITE. There are probably other things that need improving too: in particular, the question of whether it has been worked on by a paid editor. --ColinFine (talk) 18:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How do I contribute images?[edit]  Bettertoseeit (talk) 19:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Bettertoseeit Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please review WP:UPIMAGE carefully. It's not as easy to do as it may appear. You must be autoconfirmed(account is four days old with 10 edits or more) to upload images yourself, but you can visit Files for upload to get assistance with doing so if not autoconfirmed. 331dot (talk) 19:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating Book Pages[edit] Hello. One of the reasons I became an editor was an interest in filling some of the gaps in bibliographies I am familiar with. What I'm unsure about is if an author has a large bibliography with Wiki articles already created for most of their books (for example; Stephen Baxter bibliography), am I safe in assuming I can create pages for those novels which do not have an article, or might the lack of an article be for a reason? Thanks in advance. John Bullock (talk) 20:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Such novels still have to be independently notable. Ruslik_Zero 20:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Jbullock83 Welcome to Tea House! In general, a notable author does not mean their books are automatically notable and vice versa, see WP:NOTINHERIT, however in the book specific Wikipedia:Notability (books) guidelines, it does mention certain famous authors' books are likely to be automatically notable. Anything by Jane G. Austin for example, but another editor may disagree. Looking at specific notability criteria for the books themselves would be the most forward process. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 20:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the info/reply! Ruslik, Shushugah. John Bullock (talk) 21:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) ASIAN MONTH[edit] i would like to ask if my translated ( not fully complete article counts for the ediathon asian month in order to get a postcard Georgekagian (talk) 21:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian Welcome to Tea House! Your question is better asked on Wikipedia talk:Wikipedia Asian Month/2021 but if you add {{WAM talk 2021}} to the talk page of said article, a WikiProject judge will determine its eligibility for you. I doubt a full translation is needed, since each article can be independently edited anyways. It needs to comply with English Wikipedia WP:5 Principles whereas it may differ in other languages. Thank you for the question and happy editing! Good luck with the edit-a-thon! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 21:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian, looking at here, it looks like it counts unless it was a pure machine translation (e.g. Google Translate) that you didn't copy edit to correct any errors. {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 21:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) What did I do wrong?[edit] I'm the guy who created the article for Legends of the Multiverse: Draft:Legends of the Multiverse, just wondering why you rejected it? LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. The reason for the decline(not rejection) was left by the reviewer at the top of the draft. Do you have specific questions about it? 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) In short, your draft seems to have no sources. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1057012289" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 22:11 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH PrimeHunter, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 Autoconfirmed user 2 Template:Uw-create-kept 3 Audio sample 4 How to create Article page for Musical Artist 5 section formatting 6 Citing Manga 7 Problem with visual editor 8 How can I remove a website from spam or black list? 9 Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page 10 Verify my article and undelete it 11 "Can you plz help" 12 Sandbox 13 Biology 14 Help moving my draft 15 Paw partol 16 Reaching a consensus 17 I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page 18 Why i cant see my name on wikipedia?? 19 Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps 20 pokemon showdown 21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath 22 I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ? 23 A Request to add Template to talk page 24 Is Imslp a good source to back up my information? 25 Vandalism 26 My Talk Archives vanished 27 Heading correction 28 Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search? 29 how do i seen how many edits i have 30 English 31 Science 32 Bold, Italics, or Quotes? 33 Visual Editing 34 Creating a page ethically 35 Text Allignment 36 Wiki Tables 37 Prime Healthcare 38 Disambiguation-links tag on redirects 39 Do anyone think like that? 40 Help with revision 41 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 42 new wikipedia page 43 What do you do on this page 44 Help writing a page 45 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 46 Ongoing Events Section 47 Rv tags 48 Reftoolbar 49 User level 50 Dead Links 51 Add (journalist) to title 52 Distracting AFC submission templates 53 Wikipedia:Tendentious editing 54 Wikipedia Markup 55 My Talk Page 56 Newcomers 57 IP blocking for 31 hours 58 Amkgp is Sock editing 59 Article Not Published - not adequate sources 60 Final Publish 61 How do I contribute images? 62 Creating Book Pages 63 ASIAN MONTH 64 What did I do wrong? Most recent archives 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131, 1132 Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yep, @Patrick Vedel you should just close that and/or any other notes you might have and proceed to edit said article. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The sentences 2 - 5 are there in case they don't know about them. Faster than Thunder (talk) 06:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: & @Nick Moyes: thank you for guidance. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 07:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) How to create Article page for Musical Artist[edit]  Jasonseah69 (talk) 23:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69 Welcome to the Teahouse, and thank you for asking. Creating a Wikipedia article from scratch is the hardest task for anyone to achieve here - especially for a newcomer. Trying to write one about yourself is fraught with problems and issues, and will be seen as WP:PROMOTION. See our Conflict of Interest and AUTOBIOGRAPHY advice, too. But most of all, see WP:NMUSIC - this is a shortcut link to our essential Notability criteria for musicians. If you cannot find multiple, independent, in-depth sources that have written about you in detail (ignore your own PR output), and you don't meet any of the music notability criteria, then I'm afraid there's no chance. But if you feel you do meet those criteria, it's still best to leave it to someone who wants to write about you - not try to do it yourself. That person should then gain experience in editing here for some time, and then read This Guide on creating an article and submitting it for review through our Articles for Creation process, before it goes through our final 'New Page Review' process and is allowed to remain in the encyclopaedia. That's a brief outline of the process. Please do not attempt to use your Wikipedia WP:USERPAGE to write about yourself, or it will be deleted. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Good advice above. NB take "someone who wants to write about you" to mean "someone who, unprompted, wants to write about you". Not somebody asked (let alone paid) to do so. -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69: Welcome to the teahouse. You can create an article, or just submit using a draft for the Articles for Creation. However, if there aren't any sources, if may be deleted, so take your own risks for creating an article, or for less risks, create a draft. To create one, go to Wikipedia:Draft. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Severestorm28, please be aware that Jasonseah69 has only made three edits, is not autoconfirmed, and therefore cannot create an article directly. Also, their user page has been deleted as G11 - unambiguous advertising or promotion. Cullen328 (talk) 01:26, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cullen328: Next time-if someone is not autoconfirmed, and advertising, I'm giving them a warning. Thanks for the reminder. Severestorm28 (talk) 14:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) section formatting[edit] I had a draft reviewed and the reviewer suggested I use "==Section Formatting==". I cannot find any information on ==Section Formatting== on any of the help pages. Can someone send me a link which explains what ==Section Formatting== is and how to implement it? I appreciate the review and suggestions. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Looking at your draft, it's divided into headings using bold text titles, which isn't how articles are typically ordered here. If you replace the bold formatting on your section titles with two equals signs on either side, it'll create a more traditional section header for each title, which also then forces the page to create a table of contents and allows easier navigation. ??????? ? 00:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Thank You. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:47, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage COURTESY: Draft:Peebles Homestead You fixed that, but there are other problems. Several descriptive paragraphs have no references. Much of the content about his military service is general history, i.e., not about him (nor is it about the house). Hence, not relevant. David notMD (talk) 02:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) your draft has great promise. The section on the homestead today used one reference source three times, so I reformatted the citations so that the references are combined. You did a good job of finding references, can any of your sources be used for paragraphs that have no references? If not, where did you find the data about the house dimensions and construction details? If it was from a published source (such as a history book or local newspaper article) those can be used as a reference. Unfortunately, if it was from an unpublished source (such as handwritten notes found at a historical society) that would be considered original research and can't be used as a reference. You'll need to do some more work on your draft, but I'm sure it can be improved enough to be accepted. Keep up the good work. Karenthewriter (talk) 09:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Ownership gap between 1838 and 1994. David notMD (talk) 10:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Karenthewriter, Thanks for combining my multiple citations; I couldn't figure that out! The dimensions for the house (and other observations) came from me. I measured the house to see if the dimensions matched the 1798 Tax records, but I'm sure I can find them in other sources, especially the State Museum Survey. Also, I think the few sentences about Peebles' military record are relevant, because his military service adds credibility to the comment that the property could be eligible for the National Register. Without a notable person, places like Monticello and Montpelier would just be old brick houses. I could insert his military service elsewhere. Thoughts? Granted, Peebles service and the Cumberland County Militia could be separate articles which I can't do right now. I will clean up my citations. SharedHeritage (talk) 01:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @SharedHeritage: To answer your original question, see MOS:SECTIONS. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 05:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) I'm glad I could help with your multiple citations. I've been an editor since 2007 and I just recently mastered that skill. There's a lot to learn. As David notMD stated the information about Peebles military service isn't about the homestead you're writing about, so a reviewer might feel its unnecessary. (I'm not a reviewer, so I am no expert on that subject.) You mention Peebles received two different land grants. Did he receive any of his land due to his military service? If so you could state that, which would tie in the homestead with him being in the military. I live in northwest Pennsylvania, and some of the area's earliest settlers apparently received land because of their Revolutionary War service, so that's why I asked about the land grants. One thing you need to be aware of is that Wikipedia does not want any original research, or writers speculating on what happened. (To quote Sergeant Friday from the old TV show Dragnet – "Just the facts, ma'am.") So I'm a bit concerned about such phrases as "it is reasonable to believe that the windows are original..." and "The two front doors were likely replaced at this time," for that reads as though you are guessing or giving an opinion. You can quote someone and say that researcher Joe Smart-Guy believes the windows are original, and give a reference citation, but don't make it sound as though it's your conclusion. Remember that you're writing an encyclopedia article for the general reading public, and not trying to convince a historical commission to add the house to the National Register. I hope I'm not overwhelming your with details, but I'm aware that writing for Wikipedia means following Wikipedia rules. Best wishes on your research and writing project. Karenthewriter (talk) 05:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Manga[edit] Hi, I'm new to Wikipedia. I am currently trying to figure out how to add a small detail to a page about Kennedy Space Center in Pop Culture. I'm wondering how I should cite the manga volumes of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure for the details I need. Should I use a pre-existing source on Wikipedia to the volumes that links to the publisher's website, or should i use the ISBN and author info as my citation? Cheese420 (talk) 04:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Author, book title, place, publisher, year, ISBN, and page number, Cheese420. And perhaps additional info besides, such as details of the original publication. -- Hoary (talk) 05:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cheese420 I'm going to disagree with @Hoary here. For a WP-pop cult section, you don't cite the manga, you cite a WP:RS that noticed that the manga had the KSC in it and bothered to write something about it, like at least some of the films are mentioned at [1]. Anything in that section without a decent secondary source should be removed. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) That would be better, yes. (But I'd rather got the impression that that was a lost cause.) If a secondary source comments on the pop culture item and one can cite the former, wouldn't the listing be more informative if publication details of the pop culture item itself were supplied as well? -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I will not object to adding primary source as well, but personally I wouldn't bother. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Compare, for example, Death Note at Donald Trump in popular culture. Warning, the DT article has some scary stuff. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Shocking stuff indeed, Gråbergs Gråa Sång. Not least the revelation that "Trump has an article on the online encyclopedia Wikipedia." (Well I never!) -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I may have to disagree here too, that does seem the least shocking item to me ;-) Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Problem with visual editor[edit] When I edit wikitables using Visual Editor, the tools doesn't work, I'm trying to edit a text within the table but whenever I tap the wikitable, it goes lock. Can anyone help me? Anyone? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 05:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Could you tell us which table in which article you're trying to edit? The most common cause that I can think of is that the table's cells are created with templates instead of the usual table syntax, but I have to see the table itself to know. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:46, 22 November 2021 (UTC) In filmography table. After seeing this problem, I've tried to edit in other device, but still not working. Maybe only mobile user can experience this problem. The Visual editor was okay before, it works well, but it is not working now. It's not a template, it's wikitable, could you please help me, I can't edit using visual editor—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 12:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) The question you were asked was "which table in which article"? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Blp articles, or almost all articles that has wikitable. I'm using VE until now because of referencing. But using VE to edit wikitables, doesn't work when using a mobile. The VE is working properly before—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 13:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Please provide the specific name of one article where you are having this issue. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 05:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty: Try to look my sandbox, there is a draft article with a table there. I can't link specific article, because I'm having this problem in all articles that has a table, my example is my sandbox—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: I had no problem editing the wikitable on user:Ctrlwiki/sandbox with VisualEditor with my Windows 10 PC and Google Chrome. What hardware/software are you using? Are you using the Wikipedia app? Or are you using browser on your phone (in mobile view or desktop view)? What do you mean "it goes lock"? Could you please provide a screenshot of that situation? GoingBatty (talk) 15:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How can I remove a website from spam or black list?[edit] Hello I created a page in the sandbox and requested it to be reviewed. For this post, I used various sources, including a site, which I later found out it was blocked. Is it possible for me to request and remove the site from spam or blacklist? How? Also, is there a way to edit my written draft? AlexJan24 (talk) 06:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) hi AlexJan24! your draft is located at Draft:Bitumen penetration testing, feel free to input that in the search bar (including the Draft: prefix) to get to your draft. as for the blacklisted site, what source are you trying to use? theremay be a reason over at WP:RSP as to why it's blacklisted. if you want to add a whitelist for a page in there, you can hop over to MediaWiki talk:Spam-whitelist and request there to whitelist it for your article (but don't forget to read WP:Reliable sources first!). happy editing!  melecie  t - 06:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) thank you @Melecie! :) I want to use this URL: {infinitygalaxy.org/bitumen-penetration-test/} I am pretty sure that it has a good and reliable information. AlexJan24 (talk) 08:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @AlexJan24 This is a commercial website, and content like that is often placed on them to help promote their business and public perception. Can you not find something more academic and less dependent of one particular company? How about https://www.academia.edu/37842763/Penetration_Test_on_Bituminous_Materials ? Nick Moyes (talk) 10:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Nick Moyes, thank you for your suggestion! :) actually, the page you mentioned is good, but does not have the content I want. Moreover it is paid content not free. I am a petrochemical engineer. In fact, I have decided to write about such tests, which are very important and useful in the industry. As compared to other sites, I find this one to have more complete content. AlexJan24 (talk) 13:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page[edit] Hi guys I'm still feeling a bit lost. I have some factually updated text I would like to add to the BDR Thermea page. I have made my identity and intentions clear and being open, honest and upfront. There is no marketing-speak in the text. Please advise how I can place this new text. TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass: As said before, you should file an edit request on the talk page at Talk:BDR Thermea by following the instructions listed at {{Request edit}}. Even though you think the text is neutral, it may not be by Wikipedia's strict standards, so it'd still be better for more experienced editors to take a second look at it before it goes into the article. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 10:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass The best approach is to find the worst-offending sentences. For each one, create a new line and state: For [insert incorrect sentence here] please replace with ['insert better-worded sentence here] [add the url to a reliable source]. Then move on to the next issue and do the same. I fear you may have dumped a huge rewrite request on the talk page which I, for one, would not want to have to deal with. "Slowly slowly catchee monkey" as, I believe, they say. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Nick Moyes Thought I was making things easier for the editors! :) No harm intended. This is my thinking: Removed outdated text, updated facts and figures, and added a par on their new strategic focus. The company has undergone has lot of change since the original text was created. Have endeavoured to keep it short, sharp and factual and externally validated where I can. Still incorrect? I am no coder and find it really hard to navigate around Wikipedia. Sorry to be a bother but any help really appreciated.TracyMelass (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Verify my article and undelete it[edit]  Itswajidshaikh00 (talk) 11:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft_talk:Wajid_shaikh I see a draft whose text is "Hey team, i just created a page of living person autobiography with reliable sources and references citations kindly give me a hope to verifiy my new article". What I don't see is a biography of any kind. As for autobiographies, you're at the wrong website. -- Hoary (talk) 11:27, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have since been indefinitely blocked. You must succeed in appealing your block to have your account reinstated. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) FTR: Wikipedia:Sockpuppet investigations/Iwajidshaikh. --bonadea contributions talk 21:44, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Draft and article titles salted. Mjroots (talk) 11:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) "Can you plz help"[edit]  Priyanka9868 (talk) 11:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I HAVE TRIED SEVERAL TIME PUBLISHING CONTENT ON WIKIPEDIA BUT IT IS SHOWING PROMOTION CAN YOU PLZ HELP No need for capitals, Priyanka9868. Which article(s) or draft(s) are you asking about? -- Hoary (talk) 11:29, 22 November 2021 (UTC) This is the page Draft:Kapil Gupta — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868 (talk • contribs) 12:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Priyanka9868 Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about someone and their accomplishments. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about a person, showing how they meet the special Wikipedia definition of a notable person. Most of the sources in the draft seem to be interviews with the person, or simple biographical descriptions, not in depth, significant coverage of the person. Please see Your First Article. 331dot (talk) 12:14, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I quote the deleted draft: The company comes under IT Software ,Data Analytics , AI and IOT industries. At the very outset, OMLogic is not an marketing outsourcing company, but a strategic partner for your online marketing success. They offer a holistic “one-stop-shopping” solution for the internet marketing needs of clients. Within that, what does "strategic" add to "partner", what does "holistic" add to "one-stop-shopping", and why the "your" in "your online marketing success"? And Priyanka9868, you say that you have tried to publish this; but you have not. Or anyway "Priyanka9868" has not. Are you saying that you, Alex2321 and Sattu.pandey are all the same person? -- Hoary (talk) 12:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Also, are you related to Priyanka9868146? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) User:Alex2321 created the logo for CHES Special Risk that Priyanka9868146 used in Draft:CHES Special Risk. David notMD (talk) 15:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) No, we are not a same person. Actually he is one of my linkedin friend. I was not able to upload the logo of CHES Special Risk that why I have asked him to do so. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868146 (talk • contribs) 05:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Sandbox[edit] Hello is it possible to create an article if the first one you did has not yet been reviewed? how can I write on the sandbox if it only brings the draft I had done previously?Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Faith Buyaki, it is possible. Just create and use a new sandbox. You can do this by for example clicking on User:Faith Buyaki/sandbox 2 and using that. A different name is possible; just be sure that the name starts User:Faith Buyaki/. -- Hoary (talk) 13:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Biology[edit] Biologyassignments write briefly holozoic nutrition, parasitic nutrition, feeding mechanism in holozoic organisms. 105.112.176.163 (talk) 14:53, 22 November 2021 (UTC) We're not doing your coursework for you, and nor will the reference desks. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Holozoic nutrition exists as an under-referenced, Stub article. David notMD (talk) 15:40, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Help moving my draft[edit] Hi, I have created a draft, Draft:Angel Heredia, that I think is ready for review. Angel Heredia is already a Wikipedia page, so could someone with the needed rights move the draft to Draft:Angel Heredia (soccer) before I submit it for review? Thank you in advance! 73.162.91.15 (talk) 16:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you submit your draft for review and it is accepted, the reviewer will place it at the proper title. You may wish to leave a note on the draft talk page explaining the titling issue, though. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I went ahead and moved the draft (per Wikipedia:Naming conventions (sportspeople)#Association football (soccer)) to make it easier on the reviewer. DanCherek (talk) 16:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Paw partol[edit] Can someone help with gross of paw patrol the movie as acorrding to box office mojo it at $130M[1] 92.236.253.249 (talk) 17:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt11832046/  Courtesy link: PAW_Patrol:_The_Movie RudolfRed (talk) 18:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC)  Done by Clpo13. GoingBatty (talk) 05:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reaching a consensus[edit] Hello, after many failures, I have explained why my edits should be accepted. Please share your opinion on these pages: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock Centrereded (talk) 17:41, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Centrereded. Your edits create the impression that your goal on Wikipedia is to make Marcelo Claure and Hans Georg Näder look bad. Cullen328 (talk) 18:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded: Reaching a consensus on an article talk page is much more difficult if the text that's proposed is long and consists of many sections. It is very unlikely that you will get a consensus in favour of what essentially amounts to "please restore all my edits", especially since the text you proposed to add is not quite neutral in tone. You received some very good advice and explanations of how the process works here; please take some time to read that and start a discussion about which specific points you think should be added to the article. Well-sourced criticism of individuals and companies can certainly be included in Wikipedia articles, but it has to be added in a neutral manner, and considering what is due weight. --bonadea contributions talk 20:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I also have no interest in the topics, but did see many comments that proposed refernces were not considered Wikipedia reliable source, and a general sense of 'piling on' rather than neutral point of view and appropriate length. You have been hammering at these articles since at least July, with for example, an attack-toned draft Draft:Hans Georg Näder. Why this deep and persistent interest in a draft and an article about German and Bolivian businessmen, respectively? David notMD (talk) 21:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 19:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @ACtiling, List of people from Merseyside? It's not locked or anything, you can edit it. Only add people that has a WP-article, preferably with a reference that supports that they belong on that page, see WP:TUTORIAL on how to add references. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:13, 22 November 2021 (UTC) WP:ADVENTURE can also be useful as an intro to Wikipedia. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You are on the verge of being blocked from making any edits to List of people from Merseyside. At the Administrators' Incidents board: "This is a newish editor, who is solely focussed on making changes to one article - List of people from Merseyside. They probably mean well. However, I have never before come across an editor who is so unable to listen to advice on basic editing skills - for example, they appear to believe that it's only possible to add a name to the list while removing one at the same time. They have been repeatedly advised, and occasionally warned, by several editors on numerous occasions, and directed to places like WP:Teahouse, but appear to be completely unable to comprehend what makes an edit allowable, and seem unwilling to learn. I would far prefer that they were not blocked but rather improve their skills - but sheer inability to achieve a modicum of competence appears to be an unresolvable problem. Any advice?" At issue, SPECIFICALLY, is that you are removing existing names for no valid reason, then inserting new names, but not consistent with the alphabetical order of the list. Stop removing names. Being a person from the past is not a valid reason to remove a name. Do not remove names. Stop removing names. REALLY. Or be blocked from ever editing this article again. David notMD (talk) 21:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Why i cant see my name on wikipedia??[edit] I have acted in a Bollywood movie as an lead actress, why i cant see myself on Wikipedia’s page 43.248.70.167 (talk) 22:07, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you meet the Wikipedia definition of a notable actress, you might merit an article, but it is strongly advised that you not attempt to write one yourself, see autobiography policy. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps[edit] Arbitrary merge to another page. Argonne was one of the only 13 founding corps of Drum Corps International in 1972. An editor (with no drum corps background) arbitrarily merged this page into a defunt D & B page. Argonne should hold it's own page because of it's historical significance. Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Argonne73. Please stop edit warring: that is regarded as disruptive, and may get you blocked. We get that you believe that there should be a separate article about Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps; but several experienced editors have disagreed with you, and nobody (including you) has argued for its retention at WP:Articles for deletion/Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps. Wikipedia works by consensus: if you think a change should be made (or not be made) it is up to you to persuade other editors according to Wikipedia's policies. A core policy is notability: it is not enough for a subject to be "of historical significance" (or popular, important, famous, influential or several other characteristics which would contribute to notability out in the world): in Wikipedia we use the word in a special sense, which mostly comes down to "are there enough reliably published sources, wholly independent of the subject, and containing significant coverage of the subject, to base an article on?" Several editors have expressed their opinion that the existing article does not establish this. If you want the article retained it is up to you to persuade other editors that there are adequate sources to establish (which means, finding such sources) that it meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. --ColinFine (talk) 22:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) pokemon showdown[edit] how do i find pokemon showdown ifo here DMPenguin (talk) 00:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) DMPenguin (talk) there is one sentence about Pokémon Showdown in the "Fan community" section of the Pokémon article. If you are able to find good published references about Pokémon Showdown you can expand the article's coverage on that topic. Karenthewriter (talk) 00:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi DMPenguin! there's also a small section on rules used by smogon, the community(?) that hosts pokémon showdown over at Pokémon_competitive_play#Smogon if you want to check that or help over there. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:56, 23 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath[edit] Hi there - can someone help me with my inline citations / footnotes? I am putting up my first wiki page submission and have feedback to improve this area - but unsure what else i need to do to meet criteria. Feedback on my new page appreciated: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath Claire Leaf (talk) 03:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Three points. First, an index number ("<ref> ... </ref>") comes immediately after a comma, period, etc; not before it. Secondly, you can (and most drafts should) reuse references: ("<ref name="XYZ">full details</ref>" for the first instance, "<ref name="XYZ" />" for each subsequent instance, where "XYZ" is something distinctive). Thirdly, for any reference, you format a link something like this Author, "[https://www.example.com/blah.blahblah/blah.html Title of the web page]", Website, date. Retrieved date. -- Hoary (talk) 03:14, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Claire Leaf. Please read Referencing for beginners. There are many techniques for creating useful references. What they all have in common is that uninformative bare URLs are not displayed, but instead text based references are displayed, which include all of the relevant bibliographic details of the reference. Things like title, author, publication or publisher, date of publication, page numbers, ISBN numbers for books, and the like. Cullen328 (talk) 03:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I fixed some of the references, but in doing so, discovered that the draft as submitted is a close paraphrasing of reference #2: https://leafie.org/seizurerescuebreath/. Reword, so that the text is in your own word rather than sentences verbatim. As for the refs I did not fix, the above link shows how to convert URLs to valid refs. There remains one other problem that may b insurmountable. Wikipedia requires that for health articles, refs meet criteria described at WP:MEDRS. The refs you have do not appear to be sufficient, i.e., not review articles of multiple clinical trials. David notMD (talk) 03:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ?[edit]  Ayaelmelegy (talk) 04:06, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Ayaelmelegy, I took a quick look at the first of these. It has 13 references, but there's no indication of which of the 13 is a reference for which part of the draft. Additionally, each of the 13 is just a "bare URL". Please see the section immediately above for how to improve the references. -- Hoary (talk) 04:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Second one, drafts also URLs. David notMD (talk) 05:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) A Request to add Template to talk page[edit] As a new Wikipedia user, I always wondered how to add Template like example NoACEMM to a User talk. Moreno Ardan1 (talk) 3:18, 23 November 2021 FYI?– Removed duplicate signature As the message on your talk page suggests, you can just add {{NoACEMM}} to your own talk page. Templates usually belong to the top of talk pages. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:25, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is Imslp a good source to back up my information?[edit] Ok so I want to edit Dolores Paterno because it says there that the original lyrics were in Spanish and translated by Levi Celerio which is not true because the original sheet music from 1880 already had Tagalog lyrics and Levi Celerio added another version of lyrics.(since the original song was published before Levi was born) I don't know other sources but the sheet music in Imslp.com that explains this. Isangtaosamundo (talk) 08:28, 23 November 2021 (UTC) In your place, I'd (i) add {{Dubious|date=November 2021}} immediately after the sentence The lyrics were translated from Spanish into Tagalog by the Filipino National Artist Levi Celerio; and (ii) raise the matter on Talk:Dolores Paterno. In the latter, give your reasons for saying that it's not true. I'm unfamiliar with imslp.com; in its current state, I have to say that it looks like mere junk. Can you perhaps retrieve an earlier, reliable version from the Wayback Machine? If so, give the title and URL of the relevant page. Feel free to cite other reliable sources (books, journals) even if they haven't been reproduced on the web and aren't downloadable. -- Hoary (talk) 10:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism[edit] Hi, I wanted to know the precise difference between blatant and subtle vandalism. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:34, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! basically subtle vandalism is vandalism where there is an attempt to make it seem real or otherwise hide it from others, for example changing a date to "21 April" which may seem real until further inspection instead of something obviously fake such as "420 January" such as the case with blatant vandalism. other such cases are, from the page linked, are adding plausible misinformation to articles (such as minor alteration of facts or additions of plausible-sounding hoaxes), hiding vandalism (such as by making two bad edits and reverting only one), simultaneously using multiple accounts or IP addresses to vandalize, abuse of maintenance and deletion templates, or reverting legitimate edits with the intent of hindering the improvement of pages. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a bunch @Melecie. But still I want some help. Can you tell me what type of vandalism the two edits are in page Warfaze, which I reverted moments back. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) it may be one of those edits that fall in between, like if you understand bengali it would probably be visible that it's an attempt at vandalism, while if you don't it could be understood as an attempt to add something constructively to a page.  melecie  t - 10:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Yeah so the language matters. Any way that you @Melecie. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Archives vanished[edit] I went to my own Talk to archive discussions, only to see that my previously created archives have vanished. Any idea what happened? David notMD (talk) 11:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Nevermind. Tracked it down to a self-inflicted deletion of "Talk header"" months ago. David notMD (talk) 11:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Heading correction[edit] How do i correct a spelling on the heading? i added an unwanted letter on the heading and need to remove it . How do i do it.  11:19, 23 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by ChabbieCee (talk • contribs) ChabbieCee, you edit a regular heading (such as "Heading correction" for this thread) just as you edit other text. As for the titles of articles or other pages, you need to "move" a page to its new title. So if you realize that the name you want for Ms Nerwande is Elisabeth (with an "s"), you view the page User:ChabbieCee/Elizabeth Nerwande, click on the option to move it, specify User:ChabbieCee/Elisabeth Nerwande, give your reason for the move, and say (i) yes you want to move any talk page there may be (if there's no talk page, no matter), and (ii) yes there should be a redirect from the old name to the new one. -- Hoary (talk) 11:42, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search?[edit] I created a draft about a dance collective called FlucT Draft:FlucT. When I do a search for "fluct" on Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?search=fluct&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go&ns0=1, the draft doesn't show up. This concerns me because I fear someone else may start an article on FlucT not realizing there is already a draft. Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen To search for a draft, you must put "Draft:" in front of the draft title. Keep in mind that users are not under any obligation to first search for a draft if they want to directly create an article. I have added the submission template to your draft so you can submit it. 331dot (talk) 11:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) 331dot thanks, I probably understood that. I just wonder if it's a good policy, because some editors may not know they have to put draft: in front, miss my draft, create their own draft, then there seems to be a duplication of effort that feels needless? Greg Dahlen (talk) 13:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Greg Dahlen, and welcome to the Teahouse. You can always open a discussion on this sort of issue at the Village pump. But in my view there are good reasons for the way it is. The Wikipedia that the public sees is six million encyclopaedia articles: nothing else. That's all that is indexed by external search engines, and that's all that the Wikipedia search box gives you unless you tell it otherwise. All the rest - talk pages, drafts, user pages, projects pages, policies, essays, etc, are "under the bonnet", seen only by those who choose to look inside. --ColinFine (talk) 13:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Greg Dahlen: There is actually a clever feature which makes it unlikely anyone would accidentally start a second draft with exactly the same name as one that already exists. If you go through all the steps to begin a new article called "FlucT" by typing that in the search box, choosing the option to "Search for pages containing FlucT" and then clicking on the red link in the search output page where it says "You may create the page "FlucT", but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered." you'll find that the newly created page will have a big banner at the top saying "There is a draft for this article at Draft:FlucT." You can confirm this by clicking on the redlink I placed in this answer, which cuts out all the searching and will now go straight into draft creation mode when clicked. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:18, 24 November 2021 (UTC) how do i seen how many edits i have[edit] how do i see how many edits i have thanks DMPenguin (talk) 13:05, 23 November 2021 (UTC) By clicking this link. -- Hoary (talk) 13:23, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DMPenguin. Just in case you're wondering where the link that Hoary mentioned above can be found, just go to your user page in in the left-hand sidebar click on "User contributions" in the "Tools" section. Then, scroll all the way down to the very bottom of the page and click on "Edit count". That's where you'll find the aforementioned link. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:30, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I go to the little toolbar (Talk, Sandbox, Preferences, Beta, Watchlist, Contributions, Log out) that's to the left of my username, which is above any Wikipedia article I'm viewing when logged in. I click on Preferences and my number of edits is shown. That's what I see on an aging Mac laptop, when using Safari as a browser, but you may see something different on your computer. Karenthewriter (talk) 17:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) English[edit] What is a tea house? 41.114.234.36 (talk) 13:32, 23 November 2021 (UTC) On Wikipedia it is a friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia. Theroadislong (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Science[edit] How do you make a tealeaf 41.190.245.5 (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. This is intended to be a friendly place for getting help in using and editing Wikipedia: for general knowledge questions, the reference desk is a better place; or often, you can look at one of our six million articles, such as tea processing. --ColinFine (talk) 14:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Bold, Italics, or Quotes?[edit] I'm writing my first ever article from scratch, albeit I've written essays for practically empty existing articles many times before, so I know what I'm doing. One thing I'm never sure about however, is when to use bold, italics and "quotations." Although I know that "quotations" are used on songs. I'm at one of those situations now, while writing about some early appearances of a former footballer turned rapper. I'm mentioning and referencing a few of the Youtube channel's he appeared on, but as they don't have Wikipedia articles like SB.TV, Mixtape Madness, Link Up TV and GRM Daily do, I'm wondering whether I should put the channel names in bold, italics or "quotations"? Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Can I have an answer please? Danstarr69 (talk) 21:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Sorry you didn't get a reply until now. I guess all our volunteers were busy! We have a 'Manual of Style' which should help you (see WP:MOS), or visit WP:BOLD; WP:ITALICS and WP:QUOTATIONS for detailed guidance. Avoid using bold in articles anywhere except the first sentence to highlight the subject, and possible later on the first use of another term that is synonymous with the page title. Bold should definitely not be used to highlight YouTueb channel names or anything else. Use italics sparingly, for things like scientific names, and use quotation marks only when you actually quote something a person genuinely said (quote it verbatim), followed by a citation to prove that they said it in that exact form. Don't make quotations very large chunks of text, and don't insert song lyrics which will probably be copyright and be instantly removed. Does that answer you now? Nick Moyes (talk) 22:53, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I'm not sure. I've just had a quick look at the articles and the Style Manual seems to help a bit. However the Be Bold article you linked doesn't seem to mention anything about when to use Bold text. And the Italics and "Quotations" articles don't look much use either, especially as the "quotations" thing isn't what I was talking about. When you mention a song, you put the song title in quotation marks like this "Song". Basically what I'm saying is... Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a website/Youtube channel which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a film/TV show which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a music mixtape/EP/LP/album which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention relevant business which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention an award ceremony and its categories which don't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a person who doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Etc etc. Here's an example paragraph, with some of the things mentioned: John Smith collaborated with Jim Smith on the song "Wikipedia is Great." The music video for "Wikipedia is Great" was released on the Youtube channel Wikipedia TV. He then released his album titled Wikipedia: Greatest Hits which won a Wikipedia Award for Best Album. The Wikipedia Awards were broadcast on BBC One. Danstarr69 (talk) 23:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Very recently I learned about MOS:TITLEABSENTBOLD and would recommend not worrying too much about the infinite rules. I'll admit I don't have an ironclad rule for italics/quotations, but whatever decision you go with, consistency within the same article is key. Sometimes certain topics have their own writing guidelines/styles tied to a specific region/grammar set. Generally bold text guidelines are defined in MOS:BOLD, not to be confused with the philosophy of WP:BOLD EDITING. Someone else will help you if need be. Thank you for the question and happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Shushugah Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Text formatting#Italic type From reading the Italics bit in the above link, it basically looks like I should use Italics whenever I want to emphasise something in the middle of a sentence, unless it's a song of course, as I already know that those are highlighted with "quotation marks." Danstarr69 (talk) 00:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Indeed! A fourth scenario that wasn't mentioned. Whether a tangentially related Article exists or doesn't exist, has no impact on whether it should be boldened/italicized or quoted. You may decide depending on its usefulness make a WP:BLUELINK for existing articles, and a WP:REDLINK for non existing articles that have strong potential to become one. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 00:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Visual Editing[edit] Hi, can anybody out here tell me how I can visually edit a table, as in this page. I could figure out how I can add a new row below a specific row, but could not figure out how to change the sl. no of all the following rows, after adding a new row. I could now answer the edit request on that talk page, not only because I could not do it, but because the edit request had not provided relevant details. Anyway, can anyone please tell me the procedure of doing it. For example, consider the following. I want to add a new row after 7th row. And add new details. So what is the procedure, using visual editing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible It's a two step process, involving both Visual Editor and Source Editor. I have copied the source code from the article into my Sandbox as it's too risky playing around with tables directly - and especially as this is just a demo. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 (Note that my edit summary links to the source page where the authors are credited - do this even in your sandbox please, as we need to credit other people's work when we upload it, as it isn't really ours to claim as our own) You'll see I have added my very own, well-known and highly-popular YouTube Channel to a newly inserted row at position 8. You should do that bit most easily in Visual Editor by Selecting Row 7, clicking the Chevron button that appears on the far left of the table and selecting Insert below. Now type in all the information/data that you can, obviously numbering this as Row 8. Ignore the fact that text is not aligned, you'll fix that in the next step. Now save your edits (Publish Changes) then go back in, but via Edit Source so that you're editing the wikimarkup.Do not use VE. Find the row with the newly added data. (Tip: use Ctrl-F to search for my surname, so you're taken straight there.) Find the line containing the position number '8' that you added. It will look likethis: |8 Copy and paste the style command from an existing centred cell and paste it in so it looks like this: | style="text-align:center" |8 Preview it to check it's centred, and repeat elsewhere as necessary. For flags and so forth, find an exisiting row contining what you need and paste that in to the empty cell (also within Source Editor, not in VE) Finally, you will now have to manually edit every subsequent row so that the row number shifts up one to accommodate the newly-inserted row. (You cannot do this automatically as you might using Excel.) It should take you just a few minutes to fix this. I stopped at fixing this at row 20, which is why there are two rows numbered 20 in my demo. Again, don't use VE for this step. Please visit this Help page to appreciate what you can do in Visual Editor and all its limitations. You can't, for example, change colours with VE - you must use source editor. The 1st line of that section I linked to mentions a 'Phabricator' list of tasks to improve VE. Follow it to appreciate what can and can't yet be done. See https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T108245 Whilst you might be frustrated that you can't do everything in Visual Editor, just remember that this tool was devised to make basic editing simpler and more WYSIWYG for beginners. Experienced editors generally tend to avoid Visual Editor and prefer using Source Editor. You are now asking about very complex editing, where either only Source Editor or a combination of both editing tools will be necessary. I hope this all makes sense. Please ping me know when you've done with the stuff in my Sandbox, and I'll then delete the content from it. Nick Moyes (talk) 16:49, 23 November 2021 (UTC) PS: Another little tip for you: Enter as much data as you can in VE. If you can't add what you want, leave some placeholder text like aaaa bbbb ccccc etc in its place. This make it much, much easier to find the right cell to edit late in Source Editor/wikimarkup. Cheers, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:54, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I really don't have words to thank you man. You just helped me beyond imagination. I really did not imagine, you would use your precious time in writing so much for me. I read this page. But could not find any help. But see, you gave me the the necessary page, which has the right information. But I could not find it myself - so foolish. I just sometimes tend to wonder, how some Wikipedians, know about every help page in Wikipedia, and have explored every nook and corner of Wikipedia. They know the exact help pages, for the exact problem, and they know which help page has that needed information. For example see, the page that I was looking into, and the page that you gave me. Such a difference. I thought I might get help from the Visual Editor help page, but you gave me the actual page which has the information that I need, the Help:Table page, under the VE section. Although both the pages may seem to have the same kind of information, but it is a huge difference. And see you also left me a PS: and gave me your great tip. Yes, in that way, it is really easy to find out. Thank you again for helping me learn Wikipedia, and with all the elder Wikipedians' kind help, I am learning so fast. Thanks again. Have a nice Wikipedia career. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes But I cannot figure out one thing, while writing the name of the channel I wrote Itcouldbepossible, but wikipedia is thinking it to be a page, and in the preview section, I see that it is writing like [1], which it thinks to be a link, for further reference you can see that in your sandbox. While yours is not looking like mine. Can you figure out and tell me what is wrong with me. I am always getting confused. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:03, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible The only think "wrong with you" is your wonderful fascination in some of the minutae of Wikipedia. Nerdiness is an asset here, as is a desire to ask questions and to learn. I only hope you then put what you're learning into practice. That's why I was willing to spend time answering someone's technical questions (even though I'm no expert on tables at all - or indeed much else, if I think about it!) The best way to learn from one's errors is first to accept that one must have made a mistake, and then to keep analysing the problem until you suddenly go ahah! that's my mistake. You never forget those types of mistakes, and that's how we learn through life. Although not normally encouraged, I give you permission to go into that section of my sandbox and make an edit there to show me the problem you're encountering. I'm not 100% sure what you're seeing. My link was actually a wikilink to the Teahouse, modified to display my name. (In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity, but might not on yours. A red link is to a page that doesn't exist, whether it's an article page, a user page or something else. The link you've just pasted above was to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/En.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible If you had put it as an external link (using one square bracket), it would look like this: [2] Both would not work becaue you accidentally repeated the en.wikipedia.org elements. You actually needed https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible as an external link, though that would not be appropriate for a table. This also works: Itcouldbepossible - I forced the User: bit to not display by putting a vertical pipe character at the end. Now I think you asked somewhere else about how we learn all this stuff. Watching, reading, doing and making mistakes. It's taken me 10 years of editing to pick up the stuff I'm now happy to share with you, but I was quite able to do most of the basic editing (apart from tables - they're really scary!) after quite a short time. I worry a bit that you're wanting to "run before you can walk", but I hope I've now managed to answer all your various questions. Good luck! Nick Moyes (talk) 11:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes, you are answering all my questions to my content. And you were saying about putting into use what I am learning. Yes, I am doing that. For example when I copied the table from your sandbox to my new tables sandbox, I wrote from whom I have copied the table. What I am wanting to say is that for example I want a wiki link to my talk page, which would show up like "Itcouldbepossible", using the vertical pipe (|) character. Then why cannot I do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very simple. [[User talk:Itcouldbepossible|Itcouldbepossible]] renders as Itcouldbepossible. For help on wikilinks, see Help:Wikilinks. --David Biddulph (talk) 12:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks, that was what I was wanting to do from the beginning. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible If you edit the source to this thread and look at my reply above, you should see exactly how I did it. The alternative is still to use the vertical pipe after your username, but to add different text (either your own name without the User: bit) or as I did when linking you to Albert Einstein! You'll work it out. Nick Moyes (talk) 12:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thank you, I wanted to tell you this from the very beginning. But you could not understand it, anyway, thank you for all the other help that you provided. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Also I want to know how I can turn by wiki redirects to green as you said here - In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:26, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Is it possible to mask external links to read the way I want. I mean Wiki links can be renamed as the editor wishes, is there any way in which external links can be masked, or is it at all possible? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating a page ethically[edit] Creating a page for my boss My boss is adamant that she wants a Wikipedia account (she's a prominent science communication researcher). I think she probably deserves one, but I'm also deeply aware that I'm biased as a prospective page author. Does anyone have any advice for me? I want to make my boss happy, but not by violating Wikipedia guidelines. Lorikie (talk) 14:26, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: You'll need to read and abide by Wikipedia:Conflict of interest. DuncanHill (talk) 14:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lorikie, and welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for being up-front about your situation. Unfortunately, there are some formidable obstacles in the way of you being able to satisfy your boss. As Duncan says, you need to read up about conflict of interest, and further, you need to make the formal declarations that you are a paid editor (it doesn't matter if you are specifically paid to do this, from what you say it is part of your job). Next, you need to drop the idea of "deserving a page", because that assumes that a Wikipedia article is in any way for the benefit of its subject. Of course many people (and other entities) do get some benefit frrom there being a Wikipedia article about them, but that is incidental: Wikipedia has no such purpose, and indeed is indifferent as to whether the subject wants an article about them or does not want an article about them. An article about your boss will not belong to her, will not be under her control, will not necessarily say what she wants it to say, and should be based almost entirely on what people wholly unconnected with her have chosen to publish about her (good or bad!) and not on what she or her associates say or want to say. You might like to show her an article about yourself isn't necessarily a good thing. The counterpart of "deserve" that Wikipedia actually uses is, "does the subject meet Wikipedia's criteria for notability? This is not directly related to prominence, importance, influence, popularity, or any of the other things that you might normally connect with "notability": in essence it is a question of whether there are enough reliably published sources, wholly unconnected with the subject to base an article on. If you and she decide that you still want there to be an article, there are more hurdles. Creating a new article is much more difficult than it looks - I liken it to building a house as your first building project, or playing a public recital after your first violin lesson, and always advise new editors to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" and how Wikipedia works. Editors who do not heed this advice often have a frustrating time as they put in a lot of work and don't understand why their house keeps falling down. Having a conflict of interest you will likely find it even harder, as you will need to basically forget everything you know about your boss, and summarise only what those independent commentators have published. If you decide to go ahead, you need to read your first article, and then use the articles for creation process to create a draft. --ColinFine (talk) 14:57, 23 November 2021 (UTC) If pressed to proceed by your boss, see if there are three or more published articles about her - content at length, not just a name-mention - and then use guidance at Help:Referencing for beginners to create references in proper ref format in your Sandbox. If you cannot find publications about her, then the effort is futile. David notMD (talk) 15:52, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: Is your boss by any chance Laura Lindenfield? If so, I think that you will have a very difficult time finding the sources you'll need for a draft article on a living person in which each and every statement has to have a reliable reference. When I Google her name, I get a number of sources but they are virtually all based on interviews (or are on websites clearly linked to her), so are not WP:INDEPENDENT. The nearest I can find that might be OK is this one at science.org which probably reaches the WP:SIGCOV for notability (specifically in her case WP:NACADEMIC) but still seems, by using language like "She is passionate about...", to take a tone that Wikipedia would not use (see WP:NPOV). Your best bet, I think, is to draft a very short article using such independent sources and then not be too disappointed if the Draft is declined: that will at least prove you have tried! Make sure you start by complying with the mandatory disclosures described at WP:PAID. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Text Allignment[edit] Any idea on text alignment in table. I want to center align some text in tables, using visual editor. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:44, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible I think you'd probably need to use wikisource code for that, using the "text-align:center; parameter. PS: I've tweaked the demo warning you placed on your sandbox page as you'd left the nowiki commands in which stop it from working. So the warning now looks like it's come from me, but obviously isn't a real vandalism warning. The best way to leave warnings is to enable WP:TWINKLE in your Preferences. Then it does it automatically for you via menu options, plus a whole lot more. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thanks for the edit. I know it is not a real vandalism warning. It is just my sandbox. If I had done something wrong, then you would have told me in the talk page. But anyway to get to the point, I have already TWINKLE enabled. I used it to start delete discussions, and got myself blocked for being thought to be a sockpuppet, since that page was created by another sock, and the sock with whom the checkusers thought me to be linked had edit warred with the previous sock. Anyway thats not the point. What you are saying is that it will give me warnings. Can you specify what warning, or what type of warnings??? Also it would be really kind of you, if you could tell me in a more precise way of how to use wikisource code, suddenly while I am writing in normal language. For example I am using "text-align:center" here, but nothing is happening. Please tell me the way, to center text in a table while using visual or source editor. Thanks for the answer, and regards. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible As I replied to you on my sandbox, it's important that you are editing tables and complex entries in WP:Source Editor not Visual Editor. Did you follow my instructions on how to switch between them, and did it work? You will get nowhere with anything other than the simplest of tables if you stick to VE. The parameter I mentioned above is wiki markup - as written with Source Editor. So, go to the table I put in my sandbox for you at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 Click 'Edit Source' next to the heading to open the section in Source Editor. (Tell me if that function is not showing, as it means you've not forced it to display via your personal Preferences setting. My default is for it to offer me both editing tools all the time - it should be yours, too, especially if you're working on tables.) Search for the word 'center' and you'll see 101 examples - one controlling each cell of data. Regarding WP:TWINKLE: Go to your own userpage. Use the drop down menu box marked 'TW' to access the Twinkle menu. The first sub-item is WARN. This opens a menu box for you to explore the various options. Try leaving yourself a first level warning against vandalism, then a second, and then a third. I can't explain all the options here for you - we expect editors to very carefully' learn for themselves how to use these powerful tools (which can easily upset other users). So read the TWINKLE page and the accompanying Documentation to understand what it can do. But it covers most of the common issues of edit waring, content removal, addition of uncited content, harassment, conflict of interest, spamming, plus single issue notices like encouragement to use edit summaries, biting newcomers, etc etc. There is a complete list of warning templates (here). Nick Moyes (talk) 10:33, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes the edit source function is showing. Also I thought that you were telling me of editing error warnings, so I asked what type of warnings. I had pasted that warning in my sandbox just to see how it looks. I knew how to use twinkle. For the table related thing, I want to know where should I place "text-align:center; parameter? I have made my edit on your sandbox. You can see that, and tell me if it is right or wrong. You will see that the table I created, it has some errors. For the channel name column I thought of adding my talk page and then renaming the wiki link as "Itcouldbepossible". But it showed up like this: ([3]) - why??? While your wiki link it redirects it to the teahouse it shows Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel? How come??? Why cannot I edit my wiki link to show my username, while on clicking it redirects to my talk page. For example yours show Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel and it redirects to WP:TH Why is mine not like that?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 11:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Tables[edit] Today I was editing random articles, when I came across Nach Baliye. I was reading the article, trying to find for any errors, when I came across this table [4]. I just sort of went mad seeing this table. Just a well formatted and advanced table, with all the color schemes, and just nice cell merging. Can anyone, for heaven's sake tell me how that table was created with all those attractive features. I don't really think that the Wiki markup was typed out. There must be some modern graphical interface, for doing such a tedious thing. I want to know how that table was created. I would really be glad, if I get the answer from someone who is an expert in this matter, and has been editing Wikipedia for a couple of years, because, I want the exact and precise method of creating such a table. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:58, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I've been editing for over 10 years and wouldn't dare to create such a thing. I have, however, created very long data tables by starting in Excel, getting all the sorting, the text and the wikilinks and in the right places before exporting it with a tool to Wikimarkup. But I'm not aware of a tool to make tables look pretty like that - so I shall await for answers from other users more experienced in such things, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: It takes work, often over time with improvements by different editors, often starting with copying the format from another page. The first similar table in the article was added by an IP here with edit summary "added table like other shows Jhalak". That may refer to Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart or an earlier season. It could maybe be tracked further back but I haven't tried. Help:Table has general help but it's complicated. Much of it is the same or similar as HTML tables which some editors already know. PrimeHunter (talk) 16:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @PrimeHunter Yes, but how did that specific table appear in Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart. How was it created??? And also I wanted to know one thing, how on Earth did you find that specific page history, when the table was added?? I have seen many people doing so. Is their anyway of finding out when a specific edit was first made, and the what edits followed?? I really don't think that you flicked through the page history. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible There are various ways to find when an edit was first made. The slow way is to look at 500 edits in View History at a time. Let's assume that covers the entire history (if not, just increase the number to 5000 in the url bar), then you can find a rough midway point, click (and note down) the date you clicked. Is the edit showing there? IF yes, go down and divide the lower half of edits into half again, and select another date to click. Is the edit there? If 'No', then it will have been made between those two date points. Divide the edits roughly in half again and then again until you find the first one where that edit was made. Doing this in conjunction with looking at View History (green numbers are positive count of bytes added/red are negative overall additions) makes this just a few minutes work. It took me just a few moments to do that for Nach Baliye, speeded up by using Ctrl-F to search for 'Scoring Chart', of which there were 823 mentions in the edit summaries. I went to the lowest one, then scrolled down a dozen or so edits further and found a massive addition by an IP on 9 March 2019 with a very helpful edit summary. Job done. Of course, that's the slow way. For simplest way to find when a short text string was first added to an article is to copy it, then go to the View History tab. Just above all the row entries, click Find addition/removal to use the 'WikiBlame' tool. Be aware that by default it only searches 500 of the latest edits before the date selected. So it will miss the first addition of text if it's a very heavily edited page as this one is unless you spend time to understand how to take advantage of the tool's searching features. I wouldn't use it to search for a chart being added, but I might focus on just one unique element or keyword in that chart. Hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks, I learnt a new thing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 10:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the answer. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Prime Healthcare[edit] My interest in CAlifornia health systems drew me to Prime Healthcare, where I was struck by the difference in how Wiki editors handle the material. Whereas large systems such as Sutter and Kaiser are given the opportunity to list history, background, hospital names, etc, Prime's editing history is aggressive and heavy handed. The result is a page listing controversy and nothing else. Prime owns 45 hospitals nationwide, employs 50000 people, but you wouldn't know it by Wiki. BTW I am in no way affiliated or compensated by Prime; my research is for a graduate program. I'm just amazed at the discrepancy and poor treatment. I haven't researched it enough to determine whether sources should be improved on deleted materials, but that is different than what edit history shows. Any attempts to improve the page are immediately deleted wholesale, in apparent violation of Wiki editing rules. (I attempted to undo some edits myself) Can anyone explain this? Prime owner Prem Reddy has made a number of enemies with his handling of labor, etc. Is that at play here? Archie515 (talk) 16:46, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Prime Healthcare Services Karenthewriter (talk) 17:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Archie515. Welcome to the Teahouse! You can discuss the issue about the content of the article on the article's talk page. The concerned editors might engage in the conversation and help you in finding a possible solution. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 17:24, 23 November 2021 (UTC) thanks but page monitors refuse to allow access and have not responded to talk page requests in the past. Now locked out from making any changes to sources. Page is an embarrassment to all Wiki contributors. Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC)Archie515Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The Controversy section is well supported by reliable published sources. It's Prime Healthcare that should be embarrassed. Maproom (talk) 23:04, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Archie515: I see you posted twice at Talk:Prime Healthcare Services. The last piece of advice you were given there was to make a specific request. I suggest you think about the worst problem with the article, and then post a specific detailed suggestion on the talk page, such as: Please change the current article text "_____________" to "_____________" based on the independent reliable source found at ___________________. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Disambiguation-links tag on redirects[edit] In this edit I intentionally changed a redirect from targeting an article to targeting a disambiguation page. To my surprise, the "adding disambiguation links" tag was added. In a way, it makes sense (I added a link to a disambiguation page), but on the other hand, the tag is probably meant for when someone adds a link in an article without knowing it's a disambiguation page, like if I added a link to Georgia or Mercury in an article. Can something be changed so that this tagging isn't activated when the end result of the edit is a redirect? I reported this at WP:EF/FP but was sent here for a reason I don't understand: the responding editor said both that the tag isn't activated and that it's working properly. 72.77.45.188 (talk) 17:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The edit filter (which interdicts edits) is separate from the tagging system (which describes what an edit is). —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 17:38, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Do anyone think like that?[edit] Are there people actually thinking that this page represents a universal and unbiased point of view? Owerthise (talk) 18:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I think like that. It doesn't seem biased to me. What direction do you think it's biased in? Maproom (talk) 18:43, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think there is such a thing as an universal point of view, certainly not about a topic connected to religion. It looks neutral to me; it may not be perfect (no article is) but there are no obvious problems. --bonadea contributions talk 19:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Owerthise: Welcome to the Teahouse! If you have a specific suggestion to improve the article, please post it on Talk:Muhammad with a reliable source and the {{edit extended-protected}} template, and another editor will review your request. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Help with revision[edit] Hello! I'm trying to revise the first two paragraphs of the Cultural context section of Cueva de las Manos and I need help with it. I've already put in a copy edit request for the whole page with the Guild of Copyeditors, but I was wondering if there was a group/person willing to help with this particular section in the meantime. I'm trying to revise the section in accordance with the following advice of FunkMonk in the talk page: There is some repetition in how you describe the paintings were returned to and were influential for the people throughout many thousands of years, perhaps check if someone of it can be consolidated or made less similar. If anyone would be willing to lend a hand in this respect it would be much appreciated. If there is a better place to ask for such help, I would be grateful if someone could point me there. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Best, Tyrone Madera (talk) 18:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) This might be better for the Talk Page, but one possible way to consolidate this might be to write this instead, which combines two separate statements: However, that so many people contributed to the artwork for thousands of years suggests the cave held great significance for the artists, with earlier groups influencing later ones through a continuous narrative, playing out over millennia. But that's just one possibility. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 18:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing this Ayaelmelegy (talk) 22:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Ayaelmelegy, and welcome to the Teahouse. I'm afraid there is quite a lot you need to do before that draft is publishable. The things that caught my attention are: Remove all the links to interviews. There are restrictions on the use of External links in articles, and in any case Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. Format all the references so that a reviewer can readily evaluate which of them are likely to be most reliable and independent. See REFB, and WP:NONENG. With you anonymous URLs it is hard to see whether your draft establishes that she meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. Remove all the evaluative language. No article should ever describe anything in Wikipedia's voice as "one of the most important" or "much needed". I get that you strongly approve of Hamdy's work, but none of that must come out in the article: it must be a neutral summary of what the independent sources say about her - and if there is criticism, then you should probably summarise that too. (You can quote a source that described something as "important" or "much needed" but you need to make sure that it is a source which is wholly unconnected with the subject). Please also see WP:NOTSOAPBOX. --ColinFine (talk) 23:12, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I did some edits would you please check them? Thank you — Preceding unsigned comment added by Ayaelmelegy (talk • contribs) 00:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) new wikipedia page[edit]  2600:1700:9C80:62E0:89ED:2A1E:FE48:ACD3 (talk) 22:08, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome. If you want to create a new article(not a page), that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content. If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Unregistered users(as well as new accounts) cannot directly create new articles. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) What do you do on this page[edit]  Jenay Ava (talk) 22:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Jenay Ava Welcome to the Teahouse. What we do is welcome new users and assist them with any problems they may encounter whilst editing Wikipedia. We recognise that it can be a steep learning curve to begin with, so we try to make that journey a little smoother for you in the hope that you will stick around and become one of our many regular contributors. Unfortunately, looking at your very first few contributions, I fear you think Wikipedia talk pages might be like a chat forum. They are not, and all we do here is help build the worlds greatest online encyclopaedia, and use the talk pages to assist us in that task. You'd be most welcome to help with this undertaking (6.2 million+ article in English so far), but this place is not a social media chat site. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:40, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Help writing a page[edit] I have the page written and now need to post to wikipedia, I have akk the references. Please help, FletcherEmma (talk) 23:37, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @FletcherEmma welcome to Tea House!. If you want to create a new article, that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content.If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. I have been editing the errors on Draft:Gehad Hamdy for while. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing? Thank you. Ayaelmelegy (talk) 00:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, some things need to be improved: (1) the article must have a lead portion (the introduction should not have a heading), (2) there should not be no links or Arabic letters in section headings, (3) there is too much text in the infobox, and Arabic text isn't needed there. There are other things, but you can start with this. Regards. — Alalch Emis (talk) 00:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) STATUS: Draft nominated for Speedy deletion and creating editor blocked as suspected sock (denies). David notMD (talk) 01:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have overhauled (Major Cleanup) the article (This specifically). Jairus is doing... ?? 02:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ayaelmelegy: Draft:Gehad Hamdy has no references in the "Biography" and "Speak Up" sections. Please add more independent reliable sources to your draft before submitting for AfC. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 06:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) GoingBatty, "Ayaelmelegy" got an indefinite block six hours before your last (and of course well-intentioned) message. -- Hoary (talk) 12:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Ongoing Events Section[edit] What happened with the ongoing events section on both the desktop website and the mobile website? It used to be a nicely categorized, bulleted set of news. But not it's just hyperlinks to specific wikipedia pages. I would use the previous style daily, it was a wonderful source for news. I wonder if there is a good reason for removing it, or if it was potentially even an oversight. Regardless I loved that feature and don't want to lose it :( 47.229.202.202 (talk) 01:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Are you confusing Portal:Current events/Sidebar and Portal:Current events? Both are linked from "In the news" on Main Page, on "Ongoing" and "Other recent events". PrimeHunter (talk) 02:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Rv tags[edit] Hello. Is it possible to remove tags? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Possibly - which tags were you considering removing, and why? GoingBatty (talk) 06:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty, no, I've no reason, I've seen some users who edit without any tags. So I asked. Can the tags be removed without any reason? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: When tags are removed from an article, it's assumed that the problems they highlight have been resolved. If an editor feels that a tag was removed prematurely, they'll add it back at their own discretion. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Tenryuu, I didn't tell about the tags of article. I told about editing tags such as "2017 wikitext editor". Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 07:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: There is a difference between Wikipedia:Tags and Wikipedia:Templates I see you removed the {{under construction}} template from the Carlos Moguel Jr. article in this edit, but you cannot remove the tag "2017 wikitext editor" from the edit. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 07:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Those are not removable. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reftoolbar[edit] How to change the date format for Reftoolbar? from Dmy to mdy. Thanks. —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Welcome to the Teahouse! It appears that there is a discussion about this at Wikipedia talk:RefToolbar#Date formats. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) User level[edit] Hi, I wanted to know how I can add a user level. I mean there will be a bar on my user page, and it will fill up as I edit articles. And beside it would be written, my next user level. Any idea on how to do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Here's a workaround, Itcouldbepossible. Just edit articles, constructively. Soon you will be "extended confirmed". Most people are, and few people will be surprised or much interested to know that you are. There are some other very minor superpowers that you can acquire; but again, few people will be interested. Some superpowers are a bit out of the ordinary, and you might want to advertise one or other of these; on the other hand, advertising them may seem somewhat vulgar. Best is to aim to be an article-improving Clark Kent. -- Hoary (talk) 11:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible Welcome to Tea House! As @Itcouldbepossible stated, it's rarely of interest to anyone else. This essay on WP:HATCOLLECTING could be useful on the mostly harms/some benefits of gamifying your user page with statistics. I do indulge myself with Wikipedia:Service awards as a way of marking specific tiers of editing. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 12:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Dead Links[edit] I see that many pages have something called 'dead links'. What are these so called 'dead links', and how can I make them alive again?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) For information about dead links, read WP:Dead links. --David Biddulph (talk) 09:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks again for the answer Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Add (journalist) to title[edit] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anshuman_Tiwari Can you write this in brackets as journalist because it is journalist? You can write Journalist in back of their name in brackets. Coolblack4 (talk) 10:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Coolblack4, and welcome to the Teahouse. We use a term in parenthesis like that in an article title only when it is necessary to distinguish between different people (or other subjects) with the same name. See WP:Disambiguation. --ColinFine (talk) 11:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Something drastic certainly should be done to this article. Sample: In digital journalism, he has created and successfully established an innovative and exclusive multilingual digital first content vertical moneybhaskar.com for Danik Bhaskar Group, DB Corp. It is the largest Hindi business portal and offers guidance, utility and wisdom based jargon free economic-business and investment content to aspiring readers in Hindi. (For one thing, I wonder what is being excluded.) -- Hoary (talk) 12:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Distracting AFC submission templates[edit] Does anyone know how to collapse or get the "this topic is not notable" AFC submission templates out of the way? I'm trying to work on a draft article, and they're distracting and take up about half of the page. wizzito | say hello! 12:43, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Those templates were put there for the benefit of reviewers, and of anyone who might want to work on improving the draft. You should not remove or collapse them. That's why they all say "Do not remove this line!" Maproom (talk) 13:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thing is, they are INCREDIBLY distracting to look at, I at least want to move them to the bottom at the page if I can't collapse or make them invisible. I just can't have them taking up 90% of the page from the top, it bothers me a lot and prevents me from working. wizzito | say hello! 13:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Reality shifting has been Declined three times and Rejected twice. I have restored the Declined and Rejection and Comments to the top of the article, where those belong. David notMD (talk) 14:23, 24 November 2021 (UTC) If you believe you can rescue this with better references, do so, but be aware that Rejected drafts are likely to be deleted and 'salted.' Make sure you have an off-Wikipedia copy. And understand that 'salted' means that an Administrator's approval would be needed to try again to create a draft on this topic. David notMD (talk) 14:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there seriously no way to get these to the bottom of the page (where they are still visible) or make them look less distracting? Your comments aren't helping me, sorry. Also, I am still working on the article; I had to rewrite it from scratch because the original user who created the draft made it look very bad and had bad formatting and grammar. (Also, they kept resubmitting it multiple times despite not addressing the concerns, I haven't submitted it yet.) It isn't anything speedy deletable (see Wikipedia:Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity), there's a Washington Post report and a scholarly article on the subject, but probably just needs to be worked on and more RS might need to be made before it gets published. wizzito | say hello! 14:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Declines and Rejections are considered a required part of draft history, so that the next reviewer can check if the weaknesses identified by previous reviewers have been addressed. Given that you have taken over a draft created and edited by other editors, you can leave a Comment to that effect with the other Comments. David notMD (talk) 14:39, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there no way to at least move it to a part of the page where it's visible by people contributing and reviewers, but not as distracting as a glob that takes up the first part of the page? If not, I may just have to move it to my userspace and work on it from there. wizzito | say hello! 14:42, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David notMD noting for the record I have reverted you; @Wizzito offers up a convincing reason why they moved them down, because it was distracting for them, and as long as they move them back up before resubmitting I see no issue with that move. That is ignoring the question whether or not these templates are relevant at all considering the rewrite currently ongoing, although it appears that at least some of the original text still exists. -- Asartea Talk | Contribs 15:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have added a Comment that you are in the process of completely revising the draft. Do as much as you can before submitting. I know nothing about the topic, but will mention that as it stand now, the lead is over-referenced. Pick at most three refs to support the Lead. Those refs and the others may be used in the body of the article, as more detail on history, reception, criticism, etc. is added. David notMD (talk) 14:47, 24 November 2021 (UTC) That's because I was working on it, putting the references in so I can use them later, and then delete the ref in the lead when I've finished reviewing the source and using it to source statements. You act like a draft should have the same standards as mainspace, and besides, I moved it to userspace anyways so I can work on it. wizzito | say hello! 14:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You didn't move it, you copied & pasted the content, so please read about copying within Wikipedia. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I want to pitch in from an outside editor. 5 declined templates, 2 separate comments, and 1 draft template? I know if I was unaware of all Wikipedia policies, this would feel very WP:BITEy to me. Is there not a better solution, in the form of an {{articlehistory}} style template? I understand why the need for all the notices (for future reviewers to know at a glance), but there can be so many better ways to do this now. --JackFromWisconsin (talk | contribs) 14:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I feel like a lot of people in this thread are being BITEy too... wizzito | say hello! 15:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My intention was to proffer advice on how to create a draft that is more likely to be accepted. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I understand, but I feel as if my questions weren't answered and were just met with a "don't do this" or "don't do that" and reverts. wizzito | say hello! 15:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Tendentious editing[edit] This is not marked as an essay. This is also not marked with the green symbol for policy, guidelines pages. So, how important are these types of guideline pages? Knight Skywalker (talk) 12:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very important. It's a supplementary explantion to the guideline WP:DE, and carries the same status. Mjroots (talk) 13:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Mjroots: If this is very important, then why Wikipedia is not including the green symbol in the box? --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I didn't use the bold format, but still the above lines are showing as in bold to me. --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You used the bold format by putting a semi-colon before the colon at the start of the line. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I've fixed the bold. Mjroots (talk) 16:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) This page is not one of Wikipedia's policies or guidelines, as it has not been thoroughly vetted by the community. Also it has category. Wikipedia essays (?) (±) Knight Skywalker (talk) 17:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Markup[edit] Is there any introduction page, or help page, or user guide page for Wikipedia Markup. If there is then please provide me. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Itcouldbepossible, you may be looking for Help:Wikitext. DanCherek (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks for the Wiki Help page, I am surely going to read it. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Page[edit] As you see now, my talk page has become a little clumsy. What is the way to make it clean? Should I archive them or is there any other option? Seeking for options. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: While you're allowed to delete conversations from your own talk page, archiving is recommended because it makes it more convenient for you and other editors to find those old conversations in the future. There are a few different ways to archive a talk page – you can do it manually or have a bot help you – and there is more information about each of those at Help:Archiving a talk page. DanCherek (talk) 14:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek I have archived the archival messages left by a bot on my talk page and have shifted them here. But I cannot move the three notification to three different headings, it is coming under a single heading. Please can you help me in that respect. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The first section starts with {| so you need to end it with |}. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Newcomers[edit] How, can I find all newcomers on Wikipedia??? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:08, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: You can find them at Special:Log/newusers but for what purpose ? 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA (talk) 15:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) IP blocking for 31 hours[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… I hope you don’t mind me asking this question: When administrators impose a block on IP addresses for the first time, the length of the block is usually 31 hours (1 day, 7 hours). Do you have any idea why administrators chose this value? Thanks. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 15:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC). It's so that they don't just wait 24 and return to the same things. 31h is also a standard length in the blocking dropdown menu and has been since before I was an admin. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Imagine a kid messing around in study hall, causing a school's IP to be blocked. A 24-hour block would allow him or her to come back the next day during the same period to cause more trouble. Deor (talk) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Amkgp is Sock editing[edit] Hi, first I was blocked on the ground of thinking to be a sockpuppet, and the sockpuppet investigation was raised by an ipv6 ip 2402:3A80:6E1:9A2E:A110:65A0:5AD7:4F15. The sock investigation page is here. In the Clerk, CheckUser, and/or patrolling admin comments section Blablubbs commented and said The filer is obviously Amkgp loutsocking. I blocked them for a bit. Then after the block expired then again another comment was added by ipv6 user 2402:3A80:1A4E:9197:C5B8:CED1:C0FD:9A1D, and then blablubbs blocked the ipv6 again. When it was proved that I am not a sockpuppet, this ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:A17E:9C61:AA1F:59E2:32A2 came and added welcomed me. Till date, I could not understand anything, why an ipv6 was coming an leaving me messages on my talk page. Today again an ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA came and gave me a vandalism warning on an edit that I made two articles namely, Piet van der Sluijs and Dré Saris, where I had only added a more reference needted tag using twinkle. It was my mistake or not is a far matter, but then he leaves me another link to learn wikipedia in under an hour link. He also answers one of my questions in the teahouse. The thing is all these ipv6 start with 2402:3A80, and blablubbs has stated previously that it is block evasion of sock amkgp. Now what is to be done? Should I raise a sockpuppet investigation request?? Would it be possible to block just huge range ipv6s? Please give me suggestion in this matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 16:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Also in there sockpuppet investigation page [[5]] we can see that the suspected sock puppets ipv6 also starts with 2402:3A80. We can also see that he got blocked because he used to edit logged out for a couple of time, and he was blocked for that reason. And also in a further section we see that he also used or uses 2409:4061::/36 this ipv6 range. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Itcouldbepossible (talk • contribs) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Article Not Published - not adequate sources[edit] Hi, I am trying to publish an article about a triceratops skull nicknamed 'Dragon King' which was sold last year which is the biggest skull ever found, but the article was rejected due to a lack of sources. The sale was private so there wasn't a lot of press generated, but what there was is referenced. The skull is definitely the biggest in the world. How would I go about validating that? Would an image of the skull with dimensions count? What could I use to validate it. Any suggestions would be very welcome. I should make clear that I have no financial stake in this at all, it is simply a fact that the skull is the biggest found and I think should be public information. Maudjohnson90 (talk) 16:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Maudjohnson90 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Wikipedia articles summarize what publicly available independent reliable sources say about a topic. If a topic is not sufficiently covered in such sources, it cannot be on Wikipedia. Documents in private hands or otherwise not available to the public cannot be used as sources here. Did no sources cover this sale, or its discovery? If some did, but not enough for a standalone article, there may be an existing article this could be mentioned in. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Shouldn't you first put any reliable information at Triceratops#Size, Maudjohnson90? That's a pretty well-watched article and if you think that particular skull needs another full article, you could discuss that on the Talk Page at Talk:Triceratops Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:59, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks Mike Turnbull! I have added information under Triceratops#Skull and that has remained since I added it. I'll discuss on the Talk Page as suggested. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Maudjohnson90 (talk • contribs) 17:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Final Publish[edit] Hello Sir, how much time does it take for the draft to get finally published ? Thank you. Johnalphanso (talk) 17:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You have not created nor submitted a draft to Articles for Creation. Is there a particular draft you are interested in? — Preceding unsigned comment added by David notMD (talk • contribs) 18:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Johnalphanso, and welcome to the Teahouse. There is no simple answer to your quewstion: a draft takes as long to be published as it takes. There is no queue, no schedule, no deadline: all editors are volunteers, and work on what they choose when they choose. If you're talking about Draft:Sanskar Desai, that will not get reviewed until it is submitted for review (add {{subst:AFC/draft}} to the top). But it will not get accepted until somebody follows Theroadislong's advice in the comment and removes all the unreliable sources from the list. It will likely not get accepted until somebody reformats the references from a useless list of URLs to a meaningful set of citations - see CITE. There are probably other things that need improving too: in particular, the question of whether it has been worked on by a paid editor. --ColinFine (talk) 18:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How do I contribute images?[edit]  Bettertoseeit (talk) 19:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Bettertoseeit Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please review WP:UPIMAGE carefully. It's not as easy to do as it may appear. You must be autoconfirmed(account is four days old with 10 edits or more) to upload images yourself, but you can visit Files for upload to get assistance with doing so if not autoconfirmed. 331dot (talk) 19:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating Book Pages[edit] Hello. One of the reasons I became an editor was an interest in filling some of the gaps in bibliographies I am familiar with. What I'm unsure about is if an author has a large bibliography with Wiki articles already created for most of their books (for example; Stephen Baxter bibliography), am I safe in assuming I can create pages for those novels which do not have an article, or might the lack of an article be for a reason? Thanks in advance. John Bullock (talk) 20:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Such novels still have to be independently notable. Ruslik_Zero 20:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Jbullock83 Welcome to Tea House! In general, a notable author does not mean their books are automatically notable and vice versa, see WP:NOTINHERIT, however in the book specific Wikipedia:Notability (books) guidelines, it does mention certain famous authors' books are likely to be automatically notable. Anything by Jane G. Austin for example, but another editor may disagree. Looking at specific notability criteria for the books themselves would be the most forward process. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 20:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the info/reply! Ruslik, Shushugah. John Bullock (talk) 21:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) ASIAN MONTH[edit] i would like to ask if my translated ( not fully complete article counts for the ediathon asian month in order to get a postcard Georgekagian (talk) 21:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian Welcome to Tea House! Your question is better asked on Wikipedia talk:Wikipedia Asian Month/2021 but if you add {{WAM talk 2021}} to the talk page of said article, a WikiProject judge will determine its eligibility for you. I doubt a full translation is needed, since each article can be independently edited anyways. It needs to comply with English Wikipedia WP:5 Principles whereas it may differ in other languages. Thank you for the question and happy editing! Good luck with the edit-a-thon! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 21:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian, looking at here, it looks like it counts unless it was a pure machine translation (e.g. Google Translate) that you didn't copy edit to correct any errors. {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 21:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) What did I do wrong?[edit] I'm the guy who created the article for Legends of the Multiverse: Draft:Legends of the Multiverse, just wondering why you rejected it? LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. The reason for the decline(not rejection) was left by the reviewer at the top of the draft. Do you have specific questions about it? 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) In short, your draft seems to have no sources. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1057012289" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 22:11 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH Cassiopeia, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 Autoconfirmed user 2 Template:Uw-create-kept 3 Audio sample 4 How to create Article page for Musical Artist 5 section formatting 6 Citing Manga 7 Problem with visual editor 8 How can I remove a website from spam or black list? 9 Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page 10 Verify my article and undelete it 11 "Can you plz help" 12 Sandbox 13 Biology 14 Help moving my draft 15 Paw partol 16 Reaching a consensus 17 I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page 18 Why i cant see my name on wikipedia?? 19 Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps 20 pokemon showdown 21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath 22 I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ? 23 A Request to add Template to talk page 24 Is Imslp a good source to back up my information? 25 Vandalism 26 My Talk Archives vanished 27 Heading correction 28 Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search? 29 how do i seen how many edits i have 30 English 31 Science 32 Bold, Italics, or Quotes? 33 Visual Editing 34 Creating a page ethically 35 Text Allignment 36 Wiki Tables 37 Prime Healthcare 38 Disambiguation-links tag on redirects 39 Do anyone think like that? 40 Help with revision 41 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 42 new wikipedia page 43 What do you do on this page 44 Help writing a page 45 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 46 Ongoing Events Section 47 Rv tags 48 Reftoolbar 49 User level 50 Dead Links 51 Add (journalist) to title 52 Distracting AFC submission templates 53 Wikipedia:Tendentious editing 54 Wikipedia Markup 55 My Talk Page 56 Newcomers 57 IP blocking for 31 hours 58 Amkgp is Sock editing 59 Article Not Published - not adequate sources 60 Final Publish 61 How do I contribute images? 62 Creating Book Pages 63 ASIAN MONTH 64 What did I do wrong? 65 Calculating and "fixing" Hubble's Constant using light speed (C) and Pi only. Most recent archives 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131, 1132 Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yep, @Patrick Vedel you should just close that and/or any other notes you might have and proceed to edit said article. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The sentences 2 - 5 are there in case they don't know about them. Faster than Thunder (talk) 06:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: & @Nick Moyes: thank you for guidance. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 07:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) How to create Article page for Musical Artist[edit]  Jasonseah69 (talk) 23:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69 Welcome to the Teahouse, and thank you for asking. Creating a Wikipedia article from scratch is the hardest task for anyone to achieve here - especially for a newcomer. Trying to write one about yourself is fraught with problems and issues, and will be seen as WP:PROMOTION. See our Conflict of Interest and AUTOBIOGRAPHY advice, too. But most of all, see WP:NMUSIC - this is a shortcut link to our essential Notability criteria for musicians. If you cannot find multiple, independent, in-depth sources that have written about you in detail (ignore your own PR output), and you don't meet any of the music notability criteria, then I'm afraid there's no chance. But if you feel you do meet those criteria, it's still best to leave it to someone who wants to write about you - not try to do it yourself. That person should then gain experience in editing here for some time, and then read This Guide on creating an article and submitting it for review through our Articles for Creation process, before it goes through our final 'New Page Review' process and is allowed to remain in the encyclopaedia. That's a brief outline of the process. Please do not attempt to use your Wikipedia WP:USERPAGE to write about yourself, or it will be deleted. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Good advice above. NB take "someone who wants to write about you" to mean "someone who, unprompted, wants to write about you". Not somebody asked (let alone paid) to do so. -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69: Welcome to the teahouse. You can create an article, or just submit using a draft for the Articles for Creation. However, if there aren't any sources, if may be deleted, so take your own risks for creating an article, or for less risks, create a draft. To create one, go to Wikipedia:Draft. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Severestorm28, please be aware that Jasonseah69 has only made three edits, is not autoconfirmed, and therefore cannot create an article directly. Also, their user page has been deleted as G11 - unambiguous advertising or promotion. Cullen328 (talk) 01:26, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cullen328: Next time-if someone is not autoconfirmed, and advertising, I'm giving them a warning. Thanks for the reminder. Severestorm28 (talk) 14:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) section formatting[edit] I had a draft reviewed and the reviewer suggested I use "==Section Formatting==". I cannot find any information on ==Section Formatting== on any of the help pages. Can someone send me a link which explains what ==Section Formatting== is and how to implement it? I appreciate the review and suggestions. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Looking at your draft, it's divided into headings using bold text titles, which isn't how articles are typically ordered here. If you replace the bold formatting on your section titles with two equals signs on either side, it'll create a more traditional section header for each title, which also then forces the page to create a table of contents and allows easier navigation. ??????? ? 00:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Thank You. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:47, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage COURTESY: Draft:Peebles Homestead You fixed that, but there are other problems. Several descriptive paragraphs have no references. Much of the content about his military service is general history, i.e., not about him (nor is it about the house). Hence, not relevant. David notMD (talk) 02:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) your draft has great promise. The section on the homestead today used one reference source three times, so I reformatted the citations so that the references are combined. You did a good job of finding references, can any of your sources be used for paragraphs that have no references? If not, where did you find the data about the house dimensions and construction details? If it was from a published source (such as a history book or local newspaper article) those can be used as a reference. Unfortunately, if it was from an unpublished source (such as handwritten notes found at a historical society) that would be considered original research and can't be used as a reference. You'll need to do some more work on your draft, but I'm sure it can be improved enough to be accepted. Keep up the good work. Karenthewriter (talk) 09:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Ownership gap between 1838 and 1994. David notMD (talk) 10:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Karenthewriter, Thanks for combining my multiple citations; I couldn't figure that out! The dimensions for the house (and other observations) came from me. I measured the house to see if the dimensions matched the 1798 Tax records, but I'm sure I can find them in other sources, especially the State Museum Survey. Also, I think the few sentences about Peebles' military record are relevant, because his military service adds credibility to the comment that the property could be eligible for the National Register. Without a notable person, places like Monticello and Montpelier would just be old brick houses. I could insert his military service elsewhere. Thoughts? Granted, Peebles service and the Cumberland County Militia could be separate articles which I can't do right now. I will clean up my citations. SharedHeritage (talk) 01:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @SharedHeritage: To answer your original question, see MOS:SECTIONS. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 05:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) I'm glad I could help with your multiple citations. I've been an editor since 2007 and I just recently mastered that skill. There's a lot to learn. As David notMD stated the information about Peebles military service isn't about the homestead you're writing about, so a reviewer might feel its unnecessary. (I'm not a reviewer, so I am no expert on that subject.) You mention Peebles received two different land grants. Did he receive any of his land due to his military service? If so you could state that, which would tie in the homestead with him being in the military. I live in northwest Pennsylvania, and some of the area's earliest settlers apparently received land because of their Revolutionary War service, so that's why I asked about the land grants. One thing you need to be aware of is that Wikipedia does not want any original research, or writers speculating on what happened. (To quote Sergeant Friday from the old TV show Dragnet – "Just the facts, ma'am.") So I'm a bit concerned about such phrases as "it is reasonable to believe that the windows are original..." and "The two front doors were likely replaced at this time," for that reads as though you are guessing or giving an opinion. You can quote someone and say that researcher Joe Smart-Guy believes the windows are original, and give a reference citation, but don't make it sound as though it's your conclusion. Remember that you're writing an encyclopedia article for the general reading public, and not trying to convince a historical commission to add the house to the National Register. I hope I'm not overwhelming your with details, but I'm aware that writing for Wikipedia means following Wikipedia rules. Best wishes on your research and writing project. Karenthewriter (talk) 05:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Manga[edit] Hi, I'm new to Wikipedia. I am currently trying to figure out how to add a small detail to a page about Kennedy Space Center in Pop Culture. I'm wondering how I should cite the manga volumes of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure for the details I need. Should I use a pre-existing source on Wikipedia to the volumes that links to the publisher's website, or should i use the ISBN and author info as my citation? Cheese420 (talk) 04:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Author, book title, place, publisher, year, ISBN, and page number, Cheese420. And perhaps additional info besides, such as details of the original publication. -- Hoary (talk) 05:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cheese420 I'm going to disagree with @Hoary here. For a WP-pop cult section, you don't cite the manga, you cite a WP:RS that noticed that the manga had the KSC in it and bothered to write something about it, like at least some of the films are mentioned at [1]. Anything in that section without a decent secondary source should be removed. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) That would be better, yes. (But I'd rather got the impression that that was a lost cause.) If a secondary source comments on the pop culture item and one can cite the former, wouldn't the listing be more informative if publication details of the pop culture item itself were supplied as well? -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I will not object to adding primary source as well, but personally I wouldn't bother. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Compare, for example, Death Note at Donald Trump in popular culture. Warning, the DT article has some scary stuff. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Shocking stuff indeed, Gråbergs Gråa Sång. Not least the revelation that "Trump has an article on the online encyclopedia Wikipedia." (Well I never!) -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I may have to disagree here too, that does seem the least shocking item to me ;-) Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Problem with visual editor[edit] When I edit wikitables using Visual Editor, the tools doesn't work, I'm trying to edit a text within the table but whenever I tap the wikitable, it goes lock. Can anyone help me? Anyone? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 05:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Could you tell us which table in which article you're trying to edit? The most common cause that I can think of is that the table's cells are created with templates instead of the usual table syntax, but I have to see the table itself to know. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:46, 22 November 2021 (UTC) In filmography table. After seeing this problem, I've tried to edit in other device, but still not working. Maybe only mobile user can experience this problem. The Visual editor was okay before, it works well, but it is not working now. It's not a template, it's wikitable, could you please help me, I can't edit using visual editor—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 12:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) The question you were asked was "which table in which article"? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Blp articles, or almost all articles that has wikitable. I'm using VE until now because of referencing. But using VE to edit wikitables, doesn't work when using a mobile. The VE is working properly before—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 13:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Please provide the specific name of one article where you are having this issue. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 05:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty: Try to look my sandbox, there is a draft article with a table there. I can't link specific article, because I'm having this problem in all articles that has a table, my example is my sandbox—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: I had no problem editing the wikitable on user:Ctrlwiki/sandbox with VisualEditor with my Windows 10 PC and Google Chrome. What hardware/software are you using? Are you using the Wikipedia app? Or are you using browser on your phone (in mobile view or desktop view)? What do you mean "it goes lock"? Could you please provide a screenshot of that situation? GoingBatty (talk) 15:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How can I remove a website from spam or black list?[edit] Hello I created a page in the sandbox and requested it to be reviewed. For this post, I used various sources, including a site, which I later found out it was blocked. Is it possible for me to request and remove the site from spam or blacklist? How? Also, is there a way to edit my written draft? AlexJan24 (talk) 06:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) hi AlexJan24! your draft is located at Draft:Bitumen penetration testing, feel free to input that in the search bar (including the Draft: prefix) to get to your draft. as for the blacklisted site, what source are you trying to use? theremay be a reason over at WP:RSP as to why it's blacklisted. if you want to add a whitelist for a page in there, you can hop over to MediaWiki talk:Spam-whitelist and request there to whitelist it for your article (but don't forget to read WP:Reliable sources first!). happy editing!  melecie  t - 06:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) thank you @Melecie! :) I want to use this URL: {infinitygalaxy.org/bitumen-penetration-test/} I am pretty sure that it has a good and reliable information. AlexJan24 (talk) 08:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @AlexJan24 This is a commercial website, and content like that is often placed on them to help promote their business and public perception. Can you not find something more academic and less dependent of one particular company? How about https://www.academia.edu/37842763/Penetration_Test_on_Bituminous_Materials ? Nick Moyes (talk) 10:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Nick Moyes, thank you for your suggestion! :) actually, the page you mentioned is good, but does not have the content I want. Moreover it is paid content not free. I am a petrochemical engineer. In fact, I have decided to write about such tests, which are very important and useful in the industry. As compared to other sites, I find this one to have more complete content. AlexJan24 (talk) 13:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page[edit] Hi guys I'm still feeling a bit lost. I have some factually updated text I would like to add to the BDR Thermea page. I have made my identity and intentions clear and being open, honest and upfront. There is no marketing-speak in the text. Please advise how I can place this new text. TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass: As said before, you should file an edit request on the talk page at Talk:BDR Thermea by following the instructions listed at {{Request edit}}. Even though you think the text is neutral, it may not be by Wikipedia's strict standards, so it'd still be better for more experienced editors to take a second look at it before it goes into the article. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 10:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass The best approach is to find the worst-offending sentences. For each one, create a new line and state: For [insert incorrect sentence here] please replace with ['insert better-worded sentence here] [add the url to a reliable source]. Then move on to the next issue and do the same. I fear you may have dumped a huge rewrite request on the talk page which I, for one, would not want to have to deal with. "Slowly slowly catchee monkey" as, I believe, they say. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Nick Moyes Thought I was making things easier for the editors! :) No harm intended. This is my thinking: Removed outdated text, updated facts and figures, and added a par on their new strategic focus. The company has undergone has lot of change since the original text was created. Have endeavoured to keep it short, sharp and factual and externally validated where I can. Still incorrect? I am no coder and find it really hard to navigate around Wikipedia. Sorry to be a bother but any help really appreciated.TracyMelass (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Verify my article and undelete it[edit]  Itswajidshaikh00 (talk) 11:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft_talk:Wajid_shaikh I see a draft whose text is "Hey team, i just created a page of living person autobiography with reliable sources and references citations kindly give me a hope to verifiy my new article". What I don't see is a biography of any kind. As for autobiographies, you're at the wrong website. -- Hoary (talk) 11:27, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have since been indefinitely blocked. You must succeed in appealing your block to have your account reinstated. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) FTR: Wikipedia:Sockpuppet investigations/Iwajidshaikh. --bonadea contributions talk 21:44, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Draft and article titles salted. Mjroots (talk) 11:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) "Can you plz help"[edit]  Priyanka9868 (talk) 11:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I HAVE TRIED SEVERAL TIME PUBLISHING CONTENT ON WIKIPEDIA BUT IT IS SHOWING PROMOTION CAN YOU PLZ HELP No need for capitals, Priyanka9868. Which article(s) or draft(s) are you asking about? -- Hoary (talk) 11:29, 22 November 2021 (UTC) This is the page Draft:Kapil Gupta — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868 (talk • contribs) 12:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Priyanka9868 Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about someone and their accomplishments. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about a person, showing how they meet the special Wikipedia definition of a notable person. Most of the sources in the draft seem to be interviews with the person, or simple biographical descriptions, not in depth, significant coverage of the person. Please see Your First Article. 331dot (talk) 12:14, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I quote the deleted draft: The company comes under IT Software ,Data Analytics , AI and IOT industries. At the very outset, OMLogic is not an marketing outsourcing company, but a strategic partner for your online marketing success. They offer a holistic “one-stop-shopping” solution for the internet marketing needs of clients. Within that, what does "strategic" add to "partner", what does "holistic" add to "one-stop-shopping", and why the "your" in "your online marketing success"? And Priyanka9868, you say that you have tried to publish this; but you have not. Or anyway "Priyanka9868" has not. Are you saying that you, Alex2321 and Sattu.pandey are all the same person? -- Hoary (talk) 12:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Also, are you related to Priyanka9868146? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) User:Alex2321 created the logo for CHES Special Risk that Priyanka9868146 used in Draft:CHES Special Risk. David notMD (talk) 15:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) No, we are not a same person. Actually he is one of my linkedin friend. I was not able to upload the logo of CHES Special Risk that why I have asked him to do so. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868146 (talk • contribs) 05:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Sandbox[edit] Hello is it possible to create an article if the first one you did has not yet been reviewed? how can I write on the sandbox if it only brings the draft I had done previously?Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Faith Buyaki, it is possible. Just create and use a new sandbox. You can do this by for example clicking on User:Faith Buyaki/sandbox 2 and using that. A different name is possible; just be sure that the name starts User:Faith Buyaki/. -- Hoary (talk) 13:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Biology[edit] Biologyassignments write briefly holozoic nutrition, parasitic nutrition, feeding mechanism in holozoic organisms. 105.112.176.163 (talk) 14:53, 22 November 2021 (UTC) We're not doing your coursework for you, and nor will the reference desks. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Holozoic nutrition exists as an under-referenced, Stub article. David notMD (talk) 15:40, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Help moving my draft[edit] Hi, I have created a draft, Draft:Angel Heredia, that I think is ready for review. Angel Heredia is already a Wikipedia page, so could someone with the needed rights move the draft to Draft:Angel Heredia (soccer) before I submit it for review? Thank you in advance! 73.162.91.15 (talk) 16:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you submit your draft for review and it is accepted, the reviewer will place it at the proper title. You may wish to leave a note on the draft talk page explaining the titling issue, though. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I went ahead and moved the draft (per Wikipedia:Naming conventions (sportspeople)#Association football (soccer)) to make it easier on the reviewer. DanCherek (talk) 16:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Paw partol[edit] Can someone help with gross of paw patrol the movie as acorrding to box office mojo it at $130M[1] 92.236.253.249 (talk) 17:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt11832046/  Courtesy link: PAW_Patrol:_The_Movie RudolfRed (talk) 18:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC)  Done by Clpo13. GoingBatty (talk) 05:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reaching a consensus[edit] Hello, after many failures, I have explained why my edits should be accepted. Please share your opinion on these pages: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock Centrereded (talk) 17:41, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Centrereded. Your edits create the impression that your goal on Wikipedia is to make Marcelo Claure and Hans Georg Näder look bad. Cullen328 (talk) 18:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded: Reaching a consensus on an article talk page is much more difficult if the text that's proposed is long and consists of many sections. It is very unlikely that you will get a consensus in favour of what essentially amounts to "please restore all my edits", especially since the text you proposed to add is not quite neutral in tone. You received some very good advice and explanations of how the process works here; please take some time to read that and start a discussion about which specific points you think should be added to the article. Well-sourced criticism of individuals and companies can certainly be included in Wikipedia articles, but it has to be added in a neutral manner, and considering what is due weight. --bonadea contributions talk 20:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I also have no interest in the topics, but did see many comments that proposed refernces were not considered Wikipedia reliable source, and a general sense of 'piling on' rather than neutral point of view and appropriate length. You have been hammering at these articles since at least July, with for example, an attack-toned draft Draft:Hans Georg Näder. Why this deep and persistent interest in a draft and an article about German and Bolivian businessmen, respectively? David notMD (talk) 21:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 19:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @ACtiling, List of people from Merseyside? It's not locked or anything, you can edit it. Only add people that has a WP-article, preferably with a reference that supports that they belong on that page, see WP:TUTORIAL on how to add references. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:13, 22 November 2021 (UTC) WP:ADVENTURE can also be useful as an intro to Wikipedia. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You are on the verge of being blocked from making any edits to List of people from Merseyside. At the Administrators' Incidents board: "This is a newish editor, who is solely focussed on making changes to one article - List of people from Merseyside. They probably mean well. However, I have never before come across an editor who is so unable to listen to advice on basic editing skills - for example, they appear to believe that it's only possible to add a name to the list while removing one at the same time. They have been repeatedly advised, and occasionally warned, by several editors on numerous occasions, and directed to places like WP:Teahouse, but appear to be completely unable to comprehend what makes an edit allowable, and seem unwilling to learn. I would far prefer that they were not blocked but rather improve their skills - but sheer inability to achieve a modicum of competence appears to be an unresolvable problem. Any advice?" At issue, SPECIFICALLY, is that you are removing existing names for no valid reason, then inserting new names, but not consistent with the alphabetical order of the list. Stop removing names. Being a person from the past is not a valid reason to remove a name. Do not remove names. Stop removing names. REALLY. Or be blocked from ever editing this article again. David notMD (talk) 21:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Why i cant see my name on wikipedia??[edit] I have acted in a Bollywood movie as an lead actress, why i cant see myself on Wikipedia’s page 43.248.70.167 (talk) 22:07, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you meet the Wikipedia definition of a notable actress, you might merit an article, but it is strongly advised that you not attempt to write one yourself, see autobiography policy. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps[edit] Arbitrary merge to another page. Argonne was one of the only 13 founding corps of Drum Corps International in 1972. An editor (with no drum corps background) arbitrarily merged this page into a defunt D & B page. Argonne should hold it's own page because of it's historical significance. Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Argonne73. Please stop edit warring: that is regarded as disruptive, and may get you blocked. We get that you believe that there should be a separate article about Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps; but several experienced editors have disagreed with you, and nobody (including you) has argued for its retention at WP:Articles for deletion/Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps. Wikipedia works by consensus: if you think a change should be made (or not be made) it is up to you to persuade other editors according to Wikipedia's policies. A core policy is notability: it is not enough for a subject to be "of historical significance" (or popular, important, famous, influential or several other characteristics which would contribute to notability out in the world): in Wikipedia we use the word in a special sense, which mostly comes down to "are there enough reliably published sources, wholly independent of the subject, and containing significant coverage of the subject, to base an article on?" Several editors have expressed their opinion that the existing article does not establish this. If you want the article retained it is up to you to persuade other editors that there are adequate sources to establish (which means, finding such sources) that it meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. --ColinFine (talk) 22:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) pokemon showdown[edit] how do i find pokemon showdown ifo here DMPenguin (talk) 00:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) DMPenguin (talk) there is one sentence about Pokémon Showdown in the "Fan community" section of the Pokémon article. If you are able to find good published references about Pokémon Showdown you can expand the article's coverage on that topic. Karenthewriter (talk) 00:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi DMPenguin! there's also a small section on rules used by smogon, the community(?) that hosts pokémon showdown over at Pokémon_competitive_play#Smogon if you want to check that or help over there. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:56, 23 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath[edit] Hi there - can someone help me with my inline citations / footnotes? I am putting up my first wiki page submission and have feedback to improve this area - but unsure what else i need to do to meet criteria. Feedback on my new page appreciated: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath Claire Leaf (talk) 03:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Three points. First, an index number ("<ref> ... </ref>") comes immediately after a comma, period, etc; not before it. Secondly, you can (and most drafts should) reuse references: ("<ref name="XYZ">full details</ref>" for the first instance, "<ref name="XYZ" />" for each subsequent instance, where "XYZ" is something distinctive). Thirdly, for any reference, you format a link something like this Author, "[https://www.example.com/blah.blahblah/blah.html Title of the web page]", Website, date. Retrieved date. -- Hoary (talk) 03:14, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Claire Leaf. Please read Referencing for beginners. There are many techniques for creating useful references. What they all have in common is that uninformative bare URLs are not displayed, but instead text based references are displayed, which include all of the relevant bibliographic details of the reference. Things like title, author, publication or publisher, date of publication, page numbers, ISBN numbers for books, and the like. Cullen328 (talk) 03:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I fixed some of the references, but in doing so, discovered that the draft as submitted is a close paraphrasing of reference #2: https://leafie.org/seizurerescuebreath/. Reword, so that the text is in your own word rather than sentences verbatim. As for the refs I did not fix, the above link shows how to convert URLs to valid refs. There remains one other problem that may b insurmountable. Wikipedia requires that for health articles, refs meet criteria described at WP:MEDRS. The refs you have do not appear to be sufficient, i.e., not review articles of multiple clinical trials. David notMD (talk) 03:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ?[edit]  Ayaelmelegy (talk) 04:06, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Ayaelmelegy, I took a quick look at the first of these. It has 13 references, but there's no indication of which of the 13 is a reference for which part of the draft. Additionally, each of the 13 is just a "bare URL". Please see the section immediately above for how to improve the references. -- Hoary (talk) 04:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Second one, drafts also URLs. David notMD (talk) 05:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) A Request to add Template to talk page[edit] As a new Wikipedia user, I always wondered how to add Template like example NoACEMM to a User talk. Moreno Ardan1 (talk) 3:18, 23 November 2021 FYI?– Removed duplicate signature As the message on your talk page suggests, you can just add {{NoACEMM}} to your own talk page. Templates usually belong to the top of talk pages. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:25, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is Imslp a good source to back up my information?[edit] Ok so I want to edit Dolores Paterno because it says there that the original lyrics were in Spanish and translated by Levi Celerio which is not true because the original sheet music from 1880 already had Tagalog lyrics and Levi Celerio added another version of lyrics.(since the original song was published before Levi was born) I don't know other sources but the sheet music in Imslp.com that explains this. Isangtaosamundo (talk) 08:28, 23 November 2021 (UTC) In your place, I'd (i) add {{Dubious|date=November 2021}} immediately after the sentence The lyrics were translated from Spanish into Tagalog by the Filipino National Artist Levi Celerio; and (ii) raise the matter on Talk:Dolores Paterno. In the latter, give your reasons for saying that it's not true. I'm unfamiliar with imslp.com; in its current state, I have to say that it looks like mere junk. Can you perhaps retrieve an earlier, reliable version from the Wayback Machine? If so, give the title and URL of the relevant page. Feel free to cite other reliable sources (books, journals) even if they haven't been reproduced on the web and aren't downloadable. -- Hoary (talk) 10:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism[edit] Hi, I wanted to know the precise difference between blatant and subtle vandalism. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:34, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! basically subtle vandalism is vandalism where there is an attempt to make it seem real or otherwise hide it from others, for example changing a date to "21 April" which may seem real until further inspection instead of something obviously fake such as "420 January" such as the case with blatant vandalism. other such cases are, from the page linked, are adding plausible misinformation to articles (such as minor alteration of facts or additions of plausible-sounding hoaxes), hiding vandalism (such as by making two bad edits and reverting only one), simultaneously using multiple accounts or IP addresses to vandalize, abuse of maintenance and deletion templates, or reverting legitimate edits with the intent of hindering the improvement of pages. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a bunch @Melecie. But still I want some help. Can you tell me what type of vandalism the two edits are in page Warfaze, which I reverted moments back. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) it may be one of those edits that fall in between, like if you understand bengali it would probably be visible that it's an attempt at vandalism, while if you don't it could be understood as an attempt to add something constructively to a page.  melecie  t - 10:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Yeah so the language matters. Any way that you @Melecie. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Archives vanished[edit] I went to my own Talk to archive discussions, only to see that my previously created archives have vanished. Any idea what happened? David notMD (talk) 11:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Nevermind. Tracked it down to a self-inflicted deletion of "Talk header"" months ago. David notMD (talk) 11:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Heading correction[edit] How do i correct a spelling on the heading? i added an unwanted letter on the heading and need to remove it . How do i do it.  11:19, 23 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by ChabbieCee (talk • contribs) ChabbieCee, you edit a regular heading (such as "Heading correction" for this thread) just as you edit other text. As for the titles of articles or other pages, you need to "move" a page to its new title. So if you realize that the name you want for Ms Nerwande is Elisabeth (with an "s"), you view the page User:ChabbieCee/Elizabeth Nerwande, click on the option to move it, specify User:ChabbieCee/Elisabeth Nerwande, give your reason for the move, and say (i) yes you want to move any talk page there may be (if there's no talk page, no matter), and (ii) yes there should be a redirect from the old name to the new one. -- Hoary (talk) 11:42, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search?[edit] I created a draft about a dance collective called FlucT Draft:FlucT. When I do a search for "fluct" on Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?search=fluct&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go&ns0=1, the draft doesn't show up. This concerns me because I fear someone else may start an article on FlucT not realizing there is already a draft. Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen To search for a draft, you must put "Draft:" in front of the draft title. Keep in mind that users are not under any obligation to first search for a draft if they want to directly create an article. I have added the submission template to your draft so you can submit it. 331dot (talk) 11:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) 331dot thanks, I probably understood that. I just wonder if it's a good policy, because some editors may not know they have to put draft: in front, miss my draft, create their own draft, then there seems to be a duplication of effort that feels needless? Greg Dahlen (talk) 13:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Greg Dahlen, and welcome to the Teahouse. You can always open a discussion on this sort of issue at the Village pump. But in my view there are good reasons for the way it is. The Wikipedia that the public sees is six million encyclopaedia articles: nothing else. That's all that is indexed by external search engines, and that's all that the Wikipedia search box gives you unless you tell it otherwise. All the rest - talk pages, drafts, user pages, projects pages, policies, essays, etc, are "under the bonnet", seen only by those who choose to look inside. --ColinFine (talk) 13:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Greg Dahlen: There is actually a clever feature which makes it unlikely anyone would accidentally start a second draft with exactly the same name as one that already exists. If you go through all the steps to begin a new article called "FlucT" by typing that in the search box, choosing the option to "Search for pages containing FlucT" and then clicking on the red link in the search output page where it says "You may create the page "FlucT", but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered." you'll find that the newly created page will have a big banner at the top saying "There is a draft for this article at Draft:FlucT." You can confirm this by clicking on the redlink I placed in this answer, which cuts out all the searching and will now go straight into draft creation mode when clicked. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:18, 24 November 2021 (UTC) how do i seen how many edits i have[edit] how do i see how many edits i have thanks DMPenguin (talk) 13:05, 23 November 2021 (UTC) By clicking this link. -- Hoary (talk) 13:23, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DMPenguin. Just in case you're wondering where the link that Hoary mentioned above can be found, just go to your user page in in the left-hand sidebar click on "User contributions" in the "Tools" section. Then, scroll all the way down to the very bottom of the page and click on "Edit count". That's where you'll find the aforementioned link. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:30, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I go to the little toolbar (Talk, Sandbox, Preferences, Beta, Watchlist, Contributions, Log out) that's to the left of my username, which is above any Wikipedia article I'm viewing when logged in. I click on Preferences and my number of edits is shown. That's what I see on an aging Mac laptop, when using Safari as a browser, but you may see something different on your computer. Karenthewriter (talk) 17:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) English[edit] What is a tea house? 41.114.234.36 (talk) 13:32, 23 November 2021 (UTC) On Wikipedia it is a friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia. Theroadislong (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Science[edit] How do you make a tealeaf 41.190.245.5 (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. This is intended to be a friendly place for getting help in using and editing Wikipedia: for general knowledge questions, the reference desk is a better place; or often, you can look at one of our six million articles, such as tea processing. --ColinFine (talk) 14:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Bold, Italics, or Quotes?[edit] I'm writing my first ever article from scratch, albeit I've written essays for practically empty existing articles many times before, so I know what I'm doing. One thing I'm never sure about however, is when to use bold, italics and "quotations." Although I know that "quotations" are used on songs. I'm at one of those situations now, while writing about some early appearances of a former footballer turned rapper. I'm mentioning and referencing a few of the Youtube channel's he appeared on, but as they don't have Wikipedia articles like SB.TV, Mixtape Madness, Link Up TV and GRM Daily do, I'm wondering whether I should put the channel names in bold, italics or "quotations"? Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Can I have an answer please? Danstarr69 (talk) 21:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Sorry you didn't get a reply until now. I guess all our volunteers were busy! We have a 'Manual of Style' which should help you (see WP:MOS), or visit WP:BOLD; WP:ITALICS and WP:QUOTATIONS for detailed guidance. Avoid using bold in articles anywhere except the first sentence to highlight the subject, and possible later on the first use of another term that is synonymous with the page title. Bold should definitely not be used to highlight YouTueb channel names or anything else. Use italics sparingly, for things like scientific names, and use quotation marks only when you actually quote something a person genuinely said (quote it verbatim), followed by a citation to prove that they said it in that exact form. Don't make quotations very large chunks of text, and don't insert song lyrics which will probably be copyright and be instantly removed. Does that answer you now? Nick Moyes (talk) 22:53, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I'm not sure. I've just had a quick look at the articles and the Style Manual seems to help a bit. However the Be Bold article you linked doesn't seem to mention anything about when to use Bold text. And the Italics and "Quotations" articles don't look much use either, especially as the "quotations" thing isn't what I was talking about. When you mention a song, you put the song title in quotation marks like this "Song". Basically what I'm saying is... Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a website/Youtube channel which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a film/TV show which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a music mixtape/EP/LP/album which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention relevant business which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention an award ceremony and its categories which don't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a person who doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Etc etc. Here's an example paragraph, with some of the things mentioned: John Smith collaborated with Jim Smith on the song "Wikipedia is Great." The music video for "Wikipedia is Great" was released on the Youtube channel Wikipedia TV. He then released his album titled Wikipedia: Greatest Hits which won a Wikipedia Award for Best Album. The Wikipedia Awards were broadcast on BBC One. Danstarr69 (talk) 23:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Very recently I learned about MOS:TITLEABSENTBOLD and would recommend not worrying too much about the infinite rules. I'll admit I don't have an ironclad rule for italics/quotations, but whatever decision you go with, consistency within the same article is key. Sometimes certain topics have their own writing guidelines/styles tied to a specific region/grammar set. Generally bold text guidelines are defined in MOS:BOLD, not to be confused with the philosophy of WP:BOLD EDITING. Someone else will help you if need be. Thank you for the question and happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Shushugah Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Text formatting#Italic type From reading the Italics bit in the above link, it basically looks like I should use Italics whenever I want to emphasise something in the middle of a sentence, unless it's a song of course, as I already know that those are highlighted with "quotation marks." Danstarr69 (talk) 00:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Indeed! A fourth scenario that wasn't mentioned. Whether a tangentially related Article exists or doesn't exist, has no impact on whether it should be boldened/italicized or quoted. You may decide depending on its usefulness make a WP:BLUELINK for existing articles, and a WP:REDLINK for non existing articles that have strong potential to become one. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 00:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Visual Editing[edit] Hi, can anybody out here tell me how I can visually edit a table, as in this page. I could figure out how I can add a new row below a specific row, but could not figure out how to change the sl. no of all the following rows, after adding a new row. I could now answer the edit request on that talk page, not only because I could not do it, but because the edit request had not provided relevant details. Anyway, can anyone please tell me the procedure of doing it. For example, consider the following. I want to add a new row after 7th row. And add new details. So what is the procedure, using visual editing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible It's a two step process, involving both Visual Editor and Source Editor. I have copied the source code from the article into my Sandbox as it's too risky playing around with tables directly - and especially as this is just a demo. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 (Note that my edit summary links to the source page where the authors are credited - do this even in your sandbox please, as we need to credit other people's work when we upload it, as it isn't really ours to claim as our own) You'll see I have added my very own, well-known and highly-popular YouTube Channel to a newly inserted row at position 8. You should do that bit most easily in Visual Editor by Selecting Row 7, clicking the Chevron button that appears on the far left of the table and selecting Insert below. Now type in all the information/data that you can, obviously numbering this as Row 8. Ignore the fact that text is not aligned, you'll fix that in the next step. Now save your edits (Publish Changes) then go back in, but via Edit Source so that you're editing the wikimarkup.Do not use VE. Find the row with the newly added data. (Tip: use Ctrl-F to search for my surname, so you're taken straight there.) Find the line containing the position number '8' that you added. It will look likethis: |8 Copy and paste the style command from an existing centred cell and paste it in so it looks like this: | style="text-align:center" |8 Preview it to check it's centred, and repeat elsewhere as necessary. For flags and so forth, find an exisiting row contining what you need and paste that in to the empty cell (also within Source Editor, not in VE) Finally, you will now have to manually edit every subsequent row so that the row number shifts up one to accommodate the newly-inserted row. (You cannot do this automatically as you might using Excel.) It should take you just a few minutes to fix this. I stopped at fixing this at row 20, which is why there are two rows numbered 20 in my demo. Again, don't use VE for this step. Please visit this Help page to appreciate what you can do in Visual Editor and all its limitations. You can't, for example, change colours with VE - you must use source editor. The 1st line of that section I linked to mentions a 'Phabricator' list of tasks to improve VE. Follow it to appreciate what can and can't yet be done. See https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T108245 Whilst you might be frustrated that you can't do everything in Visual Editor, just remember that this tool was devised to make basic editing simpler and more WYSIWYG for beginners. Experienced editors generally tend to avoid Visual Editor and prefer using Source Editor. You are now asking about very complex editing, where either only Source Editor or a combination of both editing tools will be necessary. I hope this all makes sense. Please ping me know when you've done with the stuff in my Sandbox, and I'll then delete the content from it. Nick Moyes (talk) 16:49, 23 November 2021 (UTC) PS: Another little tip for you: Enter as much data as you can in VE. If you can't add what you want, leave some placeholder text like aaaa bbbb ccccc etc in its place. This make it much, much easier to find the right cell to edit late in Source Editor/wikimarkup. Cheers, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:54, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I really don't have words to thank you man. You just helped me beyond imagination. I really did not imagine, you would use your precious time in writing so much for me. I read this page. But could not find any help. But see, you gave me the the necessary page, which has the right information. But I could not find it myself - so foolish. I just sometimes tend to wonder, how some Wikipedians, know about every help page in Wikipedia, and have explored every nook and corner of Wikipedia. They know the exact help pages, for the exact problem, and they know which help page has that needed information. For example see, the page that I was looking into, and the page that you gave me. Such a difference. I thought I might get help from the Visual Editor help page, but you gave me the actual page which has the information that I need, the Help:Table page, under the VE section. Although both the pages may seem to have the same kind of information, but it is a huge difference. And see you also left me a PS: and gave me your great tip. Yes, in that way, it is really easy to find out. Thank you again for helping me learn Wikipedia, and with all the elder Wikipedians' kind help, I am learning so fast. Thanks again. Have a nice Wikipedia career. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes But I cannot figure out one thing, while writing the name of the channel I wrote Itcouldbepossible, but wikipedia is thinking it to be a page, and in the preview section, I see that it is writing like [1], which it thinks to be a link, for further reference you can see that in your sandbox. While yours is not looking like mine. Can you figure out and tell me what is wrong with me. I am always getting confused. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:03, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible The only think "wrong with you" is your wonderful fascination in some of the minutae of Wikipedia. Nerdiness is an asset here, as is a desire to ask questions and to learn. I only hope you then put what you're learning into practice. That's why I was willing to spend time answering someone's technical questions (even though I'm no expert on tables at all - or indeed much else, if I think about it!) The best way to learn from one's errors is first to accept that one must have made a mistake, and then to keep analysing the problem until you suddenly go ahah! that's my mistake. You never forget those types of mistakes, and that's how we learn through life. Although not normally encouraged, I give you permission to go into that section of my sandbox and make an edit there to show me the problem you're encountering. I'm not 100% sure what you're seeing. My link was actually a wikilink to the Teahouse, modified to display my name. (In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity, but might not on yours. A red link is to a page that doesn't exist, whether it's an article page, a user page or something else. The link you've just pasted above was to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/En.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible If you had put it as an external link (using one square bracket), it would look like this: [2] Both would not work becaue you accidentally repeated the en.wikipedia.org elements. You actually needed https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible as an external link, though that would not be appropriate for a table. This also works: Itcouldbepossible - I forced the User: bit to not display by putting a vertical pipe character at the end. Now I think you asked somewhere else about how we learn all this stuff. Watching, reading, doing and making mistakes. It's taken me 10 years of editing to pick up the stuff I'm now happy to share with you, but I was quite able to do most of the basic editing (apart from tables - they're really scary!) after quite a short time. I worry a bit that you're wanting to "run before you can walk", but I hope I've now managed to answer all your various questions. Good luck! Nick Moyes (talk) 11:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes, you are answering all my questions to my content. And you were saying about putting into use what I am learning. Yes, I am doing that. For example when I copied the table from your sandbox to my new tables sandbox, I wrote from whom I have copied the table. What I am wanting to say is that for example I want a wiki link to my talk page, which would show up like "Itcouldbepossible", using the vertical pipe (|) character. Then why cannot I do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very simple. [[User talk:Itcouldbepossible|Itcouldbepossible]] renders as Itcouldbepossible. For help on wikilinks, see Help:Wikilinks. --David Biddulph (talk) 12:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks, that was what I was wanting to do from the beginning. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible If you edit the source to this thread and look at my reply above, you should see exactly how I did it. The alternative is still to use the vertical pipe after your username, but to add different text (either your own name without the User: bit) or as I did when linking you to Albert Einstein! You'll work it out. Nick Moyes (talk) 12:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thank you, I wanted to tell you this from the very beginning. But you could not understand it, anyway, thank you for all the other help that you provided. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Also I want to know how I can turn by wiki redirects to green as you said here - In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:26, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Is it possible to mask external links to read the way I want. I mean Wiki links can be renamed as the editor wishes, is there any way in which external links can be masked, or is it at all possible? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating a page ethically[edit] Creating a page for my boss My boss is adamant that she wants a Wikipedia account (she's a prominent science communication researcher). I think she probably deserves one, but I'm also deeply aware that I'm biased as a prospective page author. Does anyone have any advice for me? I want to make my boss happy, but not by violating Wikipedia guidelines. Lorikie (talk) 14:26, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: You'll need to read and abide by Wikipedia:Conflict of interest. DuncanHill (talk) 14:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lorikie, and welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for being up-front about your situation. Unfortunately, there are some formidable obstacles in the way of you being able to satisfy your boss. As Duncan says, you need to read up about conflict of interest, and further, you need to make the formal declarations that you are a paid editor (it doesn't matter if you are specifically paid to do this, from what you say it is part of your job). Next, you need to drop the idea of "deserving a page", because that assumes that a Wikipedia article is in any way for the benefit of its subject. Of course many people (and other entities) do get some benefit frrom there being a Wikipedia article about them, but that is incidental: Wikipedia has no such purpose, and indeed is indifferent as to whether the subject wants an article about them or does not want an article about them. An article about your boss will not belong to her, will not be under her control, will not necessarily say what she wants it to say, and should be based almost entirely on what people wholly unconnected with her have chosen to publish about her (good or bad!) and not on what she or her associates say or want to say. You might like to show her an article about yourself isn't necessarily a good thing. The counterpart of "deserve" that Wikipedia actually uses is, "does the subject meet Wikipedia's criteria for notability? This is not directly related to prominence, importance, influence, popularity, or any of the other things that you might normally connect with "notability": in essence it is a question of whether there are enough reliably published sources, wholly unconnected with the subject to base an article on. If you and she decide that you still want there to be an article, there are more hurdles. Creating a new article is much more difficult than it looks - I liken it to building a house as your first building project, or playing a public recital after your first violin lesson, and always advise new editors to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" and how Wikipedia works. Editors who do not heed this advice often have a frustrating time as they put in a lot of work and don't understand why their house keeps falling down. Having a conflict of interest you will likely find it even harder, as you will need to basically forget everything you know about your boss, and summarise only what those independent commentators have published. If you decide to go ahead, you need to read your first article, and then use the articles for creation process to create a draft. --ColinFine (talk) 14:57, 23 November 2021 (UTC) If pressed to proceed by your boss, see if there are three or more published articles about her - content at length, not just a name-mention - and then use guidance at Help:Referencing for beginners to create references in proper ref format in your Sandbox. If you cannot find publications about her, then the effort is futile. David notMD (talk) 15:52, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: Is your boss by any chance Laura Lindenfield? If so, I think that you will have a very difficult time finding the sources you'll need for a draft article on a living person in which each and every statement has to have a reliable reference. When I Google her name, I get a number of sources but they are virtually all based on interviews (or are on websites clearly linked to her), so are not WP:INDEPENDENT. The nearest I can find that might be OK is this one at science.org which probably reaches the WP:SIGCOV for notability (specifically in her case WP:NACADEMIC) but still seems, by using language like "She is passionate about...", to take a tone that Wikipedia would not use (see WP:NPOV). Your best bet, I think, is to draft a very short article using such independent sources and then not be too disappointed if the Draft is declined: that will at least prove you have tried! Make sure you start by complying with the mandatory disclosures described at WP:PAID. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Text Allignment[edit] Any idea on text alignment in table. I want to center align some text in tables, using visual editor. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:44, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible I think you'd probably need to use wikisource code for that, using the "text-align:center; parameter. PS: I've tweaked the demo warning you placed on your sandbox page as you'd left the nowiki commands in which stop it from working. So the warning now looks like it's come from me, but obviously isn't a real vandalism warning. The best way to leave warnings is to enable WP:TWINKLE in your Preferences. Then it does it automatically for you via menu options, plus a whole lot more. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thanks for the edit. I know it is not a real vandalism warning. It is just my sandbox. If I had done something wrong, then you would have told me in the talk page. But anyway to get to the point, I have already TWINKLE enabled. I used it to start delete discussions, and got myself blocked for being thought to be a sockpuppet, since that page was created by another sock, and the sock with whom the checkusers thought me to be linked had edit warred with the previous sock. Anyway thats not the point. What you are saying is that it will give me warnings. Can you specify what warning, or what type of warnings??? Also it would be really kind of you, if you could tell me in a more precise way of how to use wikisource code, suddenly while I am writing in normal language. For example I am using "text-align:center" here, but nothing is happening. Please tell me the way, to center text in a table while using visual or source editor. Thanks for the answer, and regards. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible As I replied to you on my sandbox, it's important that you are editing tables and complex entries in WP:Source Editor not Visual Editor. Did you follow my instructions on how to switch between them, and did it work? You will get nowhere with anything other than the simplest of tables if you stick to VE. The parameter I mentioned above is wiki markup - as written with Source Editor. So, go to the table I put in my sandbox for you at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 Click 'Edit Source' next to the heading to open the section in Source Editor. (Tell me if that function is not showing, as it means you've not forced it to display via your personal Preferences setting. My default is for it to offer me both editing tools all the time - it should be yours, too, especially if you're working on tables.) Search for the word 'center' and you'll see 101 examples - one controlling each cell of data. Regarding WP:TWINKLE: Go to your own userpage. Use the drop down menu box marked 'TW' to access the Twinkle menu. The first sub-item is WARN. This opens a menu box for you to explore the various options. Try leaving yourself a first level warning against vandalism, then a second, and then a third. I can't explain all the options here for you - we expect editors to very carefully' learn for themselves how to use these powerful tools (which can easily upset other users). So read the TWINKLE page and the accompanying Documentation to understand what it can do. But it covers most of the common issues of edit waring, content removal, addition of uncited content, harassment, conflict of interest, spamming, plus single issue notices like encouragement to use edit summaries, biting newcomers, etc etc. There is a complete list of warning templates (here). Nick Moyes (talk) 10:33, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes the edit source function is showing. Also I thought that you were telling me of editing error warnings, so I asked what type of warnings. I had pasted that warning in my sandbox just to see how it looks. I knew how to use twinkle. For the table related thing, I want to know where should I place "text-align:center; parameter? I have made my edit on your sandbox. You can see that, and tell me if it is right or wrong. You will see that the table I created, it has some errors. For the channel name column I thought of adding my talk page and then renaming the wiki link as "Itcouldbepossible". But it showed up like this: ([3]) - why??? While your wiki link it redirects it to the teahouse it shows Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel? How come??? Why cannot I edit my wiki link to show my username, while on clicking it redirects to my talk page. For example yours show Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel and it redirects to WP:TH Why is mine not like that?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 11:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Tables[edit] Today I was editing random articles, when I came across Nach Baliye. I was reading the article, trying to find for any errors, when I came across this table [4]. I just sort of went mad seeing this table. Just a well formatted and advanced table, with all the color schemes, and just nice cell merging. Can anyone, for heaven's sake tell me how that table was created with all those attractive features. I don't really think that the Wiki markup was typed out. There must be some modern graphical interface, for doing such a tedious thing. I want to know how that table was created. I would really be glad, if I get the answer from someone who is an expert in this matter, and has been editing Wikipedia for a couple of years, because, I want the exact and precise method of creating such a table. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:58, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I've been editing for over 10 years and wouldn't dare to create such a thing. I have, however, created very long data tables by starting in Excel, getting all the sorting, the text and the wikilinks and in the right places before exporting it with a tool to Wikimarkup. But I'm not aware of a tool to make tables look pretty like that - so I shall await for answers from other users more experienced in such things, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: It takes work, often over time with improvements by different editors, often starting with copying the format from another page. The first similar table in the article was added by an IP here with edit summary "added table like other shows Jhalak". That may refer to Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart or an earlier season. It could maybe be tracked further back but I haven't tried. Help:Table has general help but it's complicated. Much of it is the same or similar as HTML tables which some editors already know. PrimeHunter (talk) 16:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @PrimeHunter Yes, but how did that specific table appear in Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart. How was it created??? And also I wanted to know one thing, how on Earth did you find that specific page history, when the table was added?? I have seen many people doing so. Is their anyway of finding out when a specific edit was first made, and the what edits followed?? I really don't think that you flicked through the page history. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible There are various ways to find when an edit was first made. The slow way is to look at 500 edits in View History at a time. Let's assume that covers the entire history (if not, just increase the number to 5000 in the url bar), then you can find a rough midway point, click (and note down) the date you clicked. Is the edit showing there? IF yes, go down and divide the lower half of edits into half again, and select another date to click. Is the edit there? If 'No', then it will have been made between those two date points. Divide the edits roughly in half again and then again until you find the first one where that edit was made. Doing this in conjunction with looking at View History (green numbers are positive count of bytes added/red are negative overall additions) makes this just a few minutes work. It took me just a few moments to do that for Nach Baliye, speeded up by using Ctrl-F to search for 'Scoring Chart', of which there were 823 mentions in the edit summaries. I went to the lowest one, then scrolled down a dozen or so edits further and found a massive addition by an IP on 9 March 2019 with a very helpful edit summary. Job done. Of course, that's the slow way. For simplest way to find when a short text string was first added to an article is to copy it, then go to the View History tab. Just above all the row entries, click Find addition/removal to use the 'WikiBlame' tool. Be aware that by default it only searches 500 of the latest edits before the date selected. So it will miss the first addition of text if it's a very heavily edited page as this one is unless you spend time to understand how to take advantage of the tool's searching features. I wouldn't use it to search for a chart being added, but I might focus on just one unique element or keyword in that chart. Hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks, I learnt a new thing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 10:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the answer. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Prime Healthcare[edit] My interest in CAlifornia health systems drew me to Prime Healthcare, where I was struck by the difference in how Wiki editors handle the material. Whereas large systems such as Sutter and Kaiser are given the opportunity to list history, background, hospital names, etc, Prime's editing history is aggressive and heavy handed. The result is a page listing controversy and nothing else. Prime owns 45 hospitals nationwide, employs 50000 people, but you wouldn't know it by Wiki. BTW I am in no way affiliated or compensated by Prime; my research is for a graduate program. I'm just amazed at the discrepancy and poor treatment. I haven't researched it enough to determine whether sources should be improved on deleted materials, but that is different than what edit history shows. Any attempts to improve the page are immediately deleted wholesale, in apparent violation of Wiki editing rules. (I attempted to undo some edits myself) Can anyone explain this? Prime owner Prem Reddy has made a number of enemies with his handling of labor, etc. Is that at play here? Archie515 (talk) 16:46, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Prime Healthcare Services Karenthewriter (talk) 17:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Archie515. Welcome to the Teahouse! You can discuss the issue about the content of the article on the article's talk page. The concerned editors might engage in the conversation and help you in finding a possible solution. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 17:24, 23 November 2021 (UTC) thanks but page monitors refuse to allow access and have not responded to talk page requests in the past. Now locked out from making any changes to sources. Page is an embarrassment to all Wiki contributors. Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC)Archie515Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The Controversy section is well supported by reliable published sources. It's Prime Healthcare that should be embarrassed. Maproom (talk) 23:04, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Archie515: I see you posted twice at Talk:Prime Healthcare Services. The last piece of advice you were given there was to make a specific request. I suggest you think about the worst problem with the article, and then post a specific detailed suggestion on the talk page, such as: Please change the current article text "_____________" to "_____________" based on the independent reliable source found at ___________________. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Disambiguation-links tag on redirects[edit] In this edit I intentionally changed a redirect from targeting an article to targeting a disambiguation page. To my surprise, the "adding disambiguation links" tag was added. In a way, it makes sense (I added a link to a disambiguation page), but on the other hand, the tag is probably meant for when someone adds a link in an article without knowing it's a disambiguation page, like if I added a link to Georgia or Mercury in an article. Can something be changed so that this tagging isn't activated when the end result of the edit is a redirect? I reported this at WP:EF/FP but was sent here for a reason I don't understand: the responding editor said both that the tag isn't activated and that it's working properly. 72.77.45.188 (talk) 17:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The edit filter (which interdicts edits) is separate from the tagging system (which describes what an edit is). —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 17:38, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Do anyone think like that?[edit] Are there people actually thinking that this page represents a universal and unbiased point of view? Owerthise (talk) 18:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I think like that. It doesn't seem biased to me. What direction do you think it's biased in? Maproom (talk) 18:43, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think there is such a thing as an universal point of view, certainly not about a topic connected to religion. It looks neutral to me; it may not be perfect (no article is) but there are no obvious problems. --bonadea contributions talk 19:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Owerthise: Welcome to the Teahouse! If you have a specific suggestion to improve the article, please post it on Talk:Muhammad with a reliable source and the {{edit extended-protected}} template, and another editor will review your request. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Help with revision[edit] Hello! I'm trying to revise the first two paragraphs of the Cultural context section of Cueva de las Manos and I need help with it. I've already put in a copy edit request for the whole page with the Guild of Copyeditors, but I was wondering if there was a group/person willing to help with this particular section in the meantime. I'm trying to revise the section in accordance with the following advice of FunkMonk in the talk page: There is some repetition in how you describe the paintings were returned to and were influential for the people throughout many thousands of years, perhaps check if someone of it can be consolidated or made less similar. If anyone would be willing to lend a hand in this respect it would be much appreciated. If there is a better place to ask for such help, I would be grateful if someone could point me there. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Best, Tyrone Madera (talk) 18:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) This might be better for the Talk Page, but one possible way to consolidate this might be to write this instead, which combines two separate statements: However, that so many people contributed to the artwork for thousands of years suggests the cave held great significance for the artists, with earlier groups influencing later ones through a continuous narrative, playing out over millennia. But that's just one possibility. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 18:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing this Ayaelmelegy (talk) 22:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Ayaelmelegy, and welcome to the Teahouse. I'm afraid there is quite a lot you need to do before that draft is publishable. The things that caught my attention are: Remove all the links to interviews. There are restrictions on the use of External links in articles, and in any case Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. Format all the references so that a reviewer can readily evaluate which of them are likely to be most reliable and independent. See REFB, and WP:NONENG. With you anonymous URLs it is hard to see whether your draft establishes that she meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. Remove all the evaluative language. No article should ever describe anything in Wikipedia's voice as "one of the most important" or "much needed". I get that you strongly approve of Hamdy's work, but none of that must come out in the article: it must be a neutral summary of what the independent sources say about her - and if there is criticism, then you should probably summarise that too. (You can quote a source that described something as "important" or "much needed" but you need to make sure that it is a source which is wholly unconnected with the subject). Please also see WP:NOTSOAPBOX. --ColinFine (talk) 23:12, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I did some edits would you please check them? Thank you — Preceding unsigned comment added by Ayaelmelegy (talk • contribs) 00:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) new wikipedia page[edit]  2600:1700:9C80:62E0:89ED:2A1E:FE48:ACD3 (talk) 22:08, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome. If you want to create a new article(not a page), that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content. If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Unregistered users(as well as new accounts) cannot directly create new articles. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) What do you do on this page[edit]  Jenay Ava (talk) 22:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Jenay Ava Welcome to the Teahouse. What we do is welcome new users and assist them with any problems they may encounter whilst editing Wikipedia. We recognise that it can be a steep learning curve to begin with, so we try to make that journey a little smoother for you in the hope that you will stick around and become one of our many regular contributors. Unfortunately, looking at your very first few contributions, I fear you think Wikipedia talk pages might be like a chat forum. They are not, and all we do here is help build the worlds greatest online encyclopaedia, and use the talk pages to assist us in that task. You'd be most welcome to help with this undertaking (6.2 million+ article in English so far), but this place is not a social media chat site. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:40, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Help writing a page[edit] I have the page written and now need to post to wikipedia, I have akk the references. Please help, FletcherEmma (talk) 23:37, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @FletcherEmma welcome to Tea House!. If you want to create a new article, that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content.If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. I have been editing the errors on Draft:Gehad Hamdy for while. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing? Thank you. Ayaelmelegy (talk) 00:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, some things need to be improved: (1) the article must have a lead portion (the introduction should not have a heading), (2) there should not be no links or Arabic letters in section headings, (3) there is too much text in the infobox, and Arabic text isn't needed there. There are other things, but you can start with this. Regards. — Alalch Emis (talk) 00:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) STATUS: Draft nominated for Speedy deletion and creating editor blocked as suspected sock (denies). David notMD (talk) 01:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have overhauled (Major Cleanup) the article (This specifically). Jairus is doing... ?? 02:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ayaelmelegy: Draft:Gehad Hamdy has no references in the "Biography" and "Speak Up" sections. Please add more independent reliable sources to your draft before submitting for AfC. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 06:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) GoingBatty, "Ayaelmelegy" got an indefinite block six hours before your last (and of course well-intentioned) message. -- Hoary (talk) 12:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Ongoing Events Section[edit] What happened with the ongoing events section on both the desktop website and the mobile website? It used to be a nicely categorized, bulleted set of news. But not it's just hyperlinks to specific wikipedia pages. I would use the previous style daily, it was a wonderful source for news. I wonder if there is a good reason for removing it, or if it was potentially even an oversight. Regardless I loved that feature and don't want to lose it :( 47.229.202.202 (talk) 01:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Are you confusing Portal:Current events/Sidebar and Portal:Current events? Both are linked from "In the news" on Main Page, on "Ongoing" and "Other recent events". PrimeHunter (talk) 02:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Rv tags[edit] Hello. Is it possible to remove tags? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Possibly - which tags were you considering removing, and why? GoingBatty (talk) 06:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty, no, I've no reason, I've seen some users who edit without any tags. So I asked. Can the tags be removed without any reason? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: When tags are removed from an article, it's assumed that the problems they highlight have been resolved. If an editor feels that a tag was removed prematurely, they'll add it back at their own discretion. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Tenryuu, I didn't tell about the tags of article. I told about editing tags such as "2017 wikitext editor". Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 07:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: There is a difference between Wikipedia:Tags and Wikipedia:Templates I see you removed the {{under construction}} template from the Carlos Moguel Jr. article in this edit, but you cannot remove the tag "2017 wikitext editor" from the edit. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 07:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Those are not removable. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reftoolbar[edit] How to change the date format for Reftoolbar? from Dmy to mdy. Thanks. —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Welcome to the Teahouse! It appears that there is a discussion about this at Wikipedia talk:RefToolbar#Date formats. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) User level[edit] Hi, I wanted to know how I can add a user level. I mean there will be a bar on my user page, and it will fill up as I edit articles. And beside it would be written, my next user level. Any idea on how to do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Here's a workaround, Itcouldbepossible. Just edit articles, constructively. Soon you will be "extended confirmed". Most people are, and few people will be surprised or much interested to know that you are. There are some other very minor superpowers that you can acquire; but again, few people will be interested. Some superpowers are a bit out of the ordinary, and you might want to advertise one or other of these; on the other hand, advertising them may seem somewhat vulgar. Best is to aim to be an article-improving Clark Kent. -- Hoary (talk) 11:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible Welcome to Tea House! As @Itcouldbepossible stated, it's rarely of interest to anyone else. This essay on WP:HATCOLLECTING could be useful on the mostly harms/some benefits of gamifying your user page with statistics. I do indulge myself with Wikipedia:Service awards as a way of marking specific tiers of editing. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 12:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Dead Links[edit] I see that many pages have something called 'dead links'. What are these so called 'dead links', and how can I make them alive again?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) For information about dead links, read WP:Dead links. --David Biddulph (talk) 09:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks again for the answer Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Add (journalist) to title[edit] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anshuman_Tiwari Can you write this in brackets as journalist because it is journalist? You can write Journalist in back of their name in brackets. Coolblack4 (talk) 10:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Coolblack4, and welcome to the Teahouse. We use a term in parenthesis like that in an article title only when it is necessary to distinguish between different people (or other subjects) with the same name. See WP:Disambiguation. --ColinFine (talk) 11:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Something drastic certainly should be done to this article. Sample: In digital journalism, he has created and successfully established an innovative and exclusive multilingual digital first content vertical moneybhaskar.com for Danik Bhaskar Group, DB Corp. It is the largest Hindi business portal and offers guidance, utility and wisdom based jargon free economic-business and investment content to aspiring readers in Hindi. (For one thing, I wonder what is being excluded.) -- Hoary (talk) 12:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Distracting AFC submission templates[edit] Does anyone know how to collapse or get the "this topic is not notable" AFC submission templates out of the way? I'm trying to work on a draft article, and they're distracting and take up about half of the page. wizzito | say hello! 12:43, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Those templates were put there for the benefit of reviewers, and of anyone who might want to work on improving the draft. You should not remove or collapse them. That's why they all say "Do not remove this line!" Maproom (talk) 13:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thing is, they are INCREDIBLY distracting to look at, I at least want to move them to the bottom at the page if I can't collapse or make them invisible. I just can't have them taking up 90% of the page from the top, it bothers me a lot and prevents me from working. wizzito | say hello! 13:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Reality shifting has been Declined three times and Rejected twice. I have restored the Declined and Rejection and Comments to the top of the article, where those belong. David notMD (talk) 14:23, 24 November 2021 (UTC) If you believe you can rescue this with better references, do so, but be aware that Rejected drafts are likely to be deleted and 'salted.' Make sure you have an off-Wikipedia copy. And understand that 'salted' means that an Administrator's approval would be needed to try again to create a draft on this topic. David notMD (talk) 14:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there seriously no way to get these to the bottom of the page (where they are still visible) or make them look less distracting? Your comments aren't helping me, sorry. Also, I am still working on the article; I had to rewrite it from scratch because the original user who created the draft made it look very bad and had bad formatting and grammar. (Also, they kept resubmitting it multiple times despite not addressing the concerns, I haven't submitted it yet.) It isn't anything speedy deletable (see Wikipedia:Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity), there's a Washington Post report and a scholarly article on the subject, but probably just needs to be worked on and more RS might need to be made before it gets published. wizzito | say hello! 14:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Declines and Rejections are considered a required part of draft history, so that the next reviewer can check if the weaknesses identified by previous reviewers have been addressed. Given that you have taken over a draft created and edited by other editors, you can leave a Comment to that effect with the other Comments. David notMD (talk) 14:39, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there no way to at least move it to a part of the page where it's visible by people contributing and reviewers, but not as distracting as a glob that takes up the first part of the page? If not, I may just have to move it to my userspace and work on it from there. wizzito | say hello! 14:42, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David notMD noting for the record I have reverted you; @Wizzito offers up a convincing reason why they moved them down, because it was distracting for them, and as long as they move them back up before resubmitting I see no issue with that move. That is ignoring the question whether or not these templates are relevant at all considering the rewrite currently ongoing, although it appears that at least some of the original text still exists. -- Asartea Talk | Contribs 15:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have added a Comment that you are in the process of completely revising the draft. Do as much as you can before submitting. I know nothing about the topic, but will mention that as it stand now, the lead is over-referenced. Pick at most three refs to support the Lead. Those refs and the others may be used in the body of the article, as more detail on history, reception, criticism, etc. is added. David notMD (talk) 14:47, 24 November 2021 (UTC) That's because I was working on it, putting the references in so I can use them later, and then delete the ref in the lead when I've finished reviewing the source and using it to source statements. You act like a draft should have the same standards as mainspace, and besides, I moved it to userspace anyways so I can work on it. wizzito | say hello! 14:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You didn't move it, you copied & pasted the content, so please read about copying within Wikipedia. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I want to pitch in from an outside editor. 5 declined templates, 2 separate comments, and 1 draft template? I know if I was unaware of all Wikipedia policies, this would feel very WP:BITEy to me. Is there not a better solution, in the form of an {{articlehistory}} style template? I understand why the need for all the notices (for future reviewers to know at a glance), but there can be so many better ways to do this now. --JackFromWisconsin (talk | contribs) 14:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I feel like a lot of people in this thread are being BITEy too... wizzito | say hello! 15:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My intention was to proffer advice on how to create a draft that is more likely to be accepted. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I understand, but I feel as if my questions weren't answered and were just met with a "don't do this" or "don't do that" and reverts. wizzito | say hello! 15:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Tendentious editing[edit] This is not marked as an essay. This is also not marked with the green symbol for policy, guidelines pages. So, how important are these types of guideline pages? Knight Skywalker (talk) 12:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very important. It's a supplementary explantion to the guideline WP:DE, and carries the same status. Mjroots (talk) 13:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Mjroots: If this is very important, then why Wikipedia is not including the green symbol in the box? --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I didn't use the bold format, but still the above lines are showing as in bold to me. --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You used the bold format by putting a semi-colon before the colon at the start of the line. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I've fixed the bold. Mjroots (talk) 16:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) This page is not one of Wikipedia's policies or guidelines, as it has not been thoroughly vetted by the community. Also it has category. Wikipedia essays (?) (±) Knight Skywalker (talk) 17:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Markup[edit] Is there any introduction page, or help page, or user guide page for Wikipedia Markup. If there is then please provide me. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Itcouldbepossible, you may be looking for Help:Wikitext. DanCherek (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks for the Wiki Help page, I am surely going to read it. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Page[edit] As you see now, my talk page has become a little clumsy. What is the way to make it clean? Should I archive them or is there any other option? Seeking for options. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: While you're allowed to delete conversations from your own talk page, archiving is recommended because it makes it more convenient for you and other editors to find those old conversations in the future. There are a few different ways to archive a talk page – you can do it manually or have a bot help you – and there is more information about each of those at Help:Archiving a talk page. DanCherek (talk) 14:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek I have archived the archival messages left by a bot on my talk page and have shifted them here. But I cannot move the three notification to three different headings, it is coming under a single heading. Please can you help me in that respect. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The first section starts with {| so you need to end it with |}. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Newcomers[edit] How, can I find all newcomers on Wikipedia??? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:08, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: You can find them at Special:Log/newusers but for what purpose ? 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA (talk) 15:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) IP blocking for 31 hours[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… I hope you don’t mind me asking this question: When administrators impose a block on IP addresses for the first time, the length of the block is usually 31 hours (1 day, 7 hours). Do you have any idea why administrators chose this value? Thanks. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 15:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC). It's so that they don't just wait 24 and return to the same things. 31h is also a standard length in the blocking dropdown menu and has been since before I was an admin. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Imagine a kid messing around in study hall, causing a school's IP to be blocked. A 24-hour block would allow him or her to come back the next day during the same period to cause more trouble. Deor (talk) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Amkgp is Sock editing[edit] Hi, first I was blocked on the ground of thinking to be a sockpuppet, and the sockpuppet investigation was raised by an ipv6 ip 2402:3A80:6E1:9A2E:A110:65A0:5AD7:4F15. The sock investigation page is here. In the Clerk, CheckUser, and/or patrolling admin comments section Blablubbs commented and said The filer is obviously Amkgp loutsocking. I blocked them for a bit. Then after the block expired then again another comment was added by ipv6 user 2402:3A80:1A4E:9197:C5B8:CED1:C0FD:9A1D, and then blablubbs blocked the ipv6 again. When it was proved that I am not a sockpuppet, this ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:A17E:9C61:AA1F:59E2:32A2 came and added welcomed me. Till date, I could not understand anything, why an ipv6 was coming an leaving me messages on my talk page. Today again an ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA came and gave me a vandalism warning on an edit that I made two articles namely, Piet van der Sluijs and Dré Saris, where I had only added a more reference needted tag using twinkle. It was my mistake or not is a far matter, but then he leaves me another link to learn wikipedia in under an hour link. He also answers one of my questions in the teahouse. The thing is all these ipv6 start with 2402:3A80, and blablubbs has stated previously that it is block evasion of sock amkgp. Now what is to be done? Should I raise a sockpuppet investigation request?? Would it be possible to block just huge range ipv6s? Please give me suggestion in this matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 16:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Also in there sockpuppet investigation page [[5]] we can see that the suspected sock puppets ipv6 also starts with 2402:3A80. We can also see that he got blocked because he used to edit logged out for a couple of time, and he was blocked for that reason. And also in a further section we see that he also used or uses 2409:4061::/36 this ipv6 range. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Itcouldbepossible (talk • contribs) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Article Not Published - not adequate sources[edit] Hi, I am trying to publish an article about a triceratops skull nicknamed 'Dragon King' which was sold last year which is the biggest skull ever found, but the article was rejected due to a lack of sources. The sale was private so there wasn't a lot of press generated, but what there was is referenced. The skull is definitely the biggest in the world. How would I go about validating that? Would an image of the skull with dimensions count? What could I use to validate it. Any suggestions would be very welcome. I should make clear that I have no financial stake in this at all, it is simply a fact that the skull is the biggest found and I think should be public information. Maudjohnson90 (talk) 16:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Maudjohnson90 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Wikipedia articles summarize what publicly available independent reliable sources say about a topic. If a topic is not sufficiently covered in such sources, it cannot be on Wikipedia. Documents in private hands or otherwise not available to the public cannot be used as sources here. Did no sources cover this sale, or its discovery? If some did, but not enough for a standalone article, there may be an existing article this could be mentioned in. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Shouldn't you first put any reliable information at Triceratops#Size, Maudjohnson90? That's a pretty well-watched article and if you think that particular skull needs another full article, you could discuss that on the Talk Page at Talk:Triceratops Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:59, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks Mike Turnbull! I have added information under Triceratops#Skull and that has remained since I added it. I'll discuss on the Talk Page as suggested. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Maudjohnson90 (talk • contribs) 17:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Final Publish[edit] Hello Sir, how much time does it take for the draft to get finally published ? Thank you. Johnalphanso (talk) 17:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You have not created nor submitted a draft to Articles for Creation. Is there a particular draft you are interested in? — Preceding unsigned comment added by David notMD (talk • contribs) 18:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Johnalphanso, and welcome to the Teahouse. There is no simple answer to your quewstion: a draft takes as long to be published as it takes. There is no queue, no schedule, no deadline: all editors are volunteers, and work on what they choose when they choose. If you're talking about Draft:Sanskar Desai, that will not get reviewed until it is submitted for review (add {{subst:AFC/draft}} to the top). But it will not get accepted until somebody follows Theroadislong's advice in the comment and removes all the unreliable sources from the list. It will likely not get accepted until somebody reformats the references from a useless list of URLs to a meaningful set of citations - see CITE. There are probably other things that need improving too: in particular, the question of whether it has been worked on by a paid editor. --ColinFine (talk) 18:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How do I contribute images?[edit]  Bettertoseeit (talk) 19:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Bettertoseeit Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please review WP:UPIMAGE carefully. It's not as easy to do as it may appear. You must be autoconfirmed(account is four days old with 10 edits or more) to upload images yourself, but you can visit Files for upload to get assistance with doing so if not autoconfirmed. 331dot (talk) 19:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating Book Pages[edit] Hello. One of the reasons I became an editor was an interest in filling some of the gaps in bibliographies I am familiar with. What I'm unsure about is if an author has a large bibliography with Wiki articles already created for most of their books (for example; Stephen Baxter bibliography), am I safe in assuming I can create pages for those novels which do not have an article, or might the lack of an article be for a reason? Thanks in advance. John Bullock (talk) 20:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Such novels still have to be independently notable. Ruslik_Zero 20:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Jbullock83 Welcome to Tea House! In general, a notable author does not mean their books are automatically notable and vice versa, see WP:NOTINHERIT, however in the book specific Wikipedia:Notability (books) guidelines, it does mention certain famous authors' books are likely to be automatically notable. Anything by Jane G. Austin for example, but another editor may disagree. Looking at specific notability criteria for the books themselves would be the most forward process. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 20:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the info/reply! Ruslik, Shushugah. John Bullock (talk) 21:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) ASIAN MONTH[edit] i would like to ask if my translated ( not fully complete article counts for the ediathon asian month in order to get a postcard Georgekagian (talk) 21:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian Welcome to Tea House! Your question is better asked on Wikipedia talk:Wikipedia Asian Month/2021 but if you add {{WAM talk 2021}} to the talk page of said article, a WikiProject judge will determine its eligibility for you. I doubt a full translation is needed, since each article can be independently edited anyways. It needs to comply with English Wikipedia WP:5 Principles whereas it may differ in other languages. Thank you for the question and happy editing! Good luck with the edit-a-thon! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 21:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian, looking at here, it looks like it counts unless it was a pure machine translation (e.g. Google Translate) that you didn't copy edit to correct any errors. {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 21:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) What did I do wrong?[edit] I'm the guy who created the article for Legends of the Multiverse: Draft:Legends of the Multiverse, just wondering why you rejected it? LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. The reason for the decline(not rejection) was left by the reviewer at the top of the draft. Do you have specific questions about it? 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) In short, your draft seems to have no sources. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The fan film does not have any progress on the production yet, why do you expect it to be full of sources? Sources will only be added during production. (also i'm new here on wikipedia so i don't know what exactly are sources) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Please review what a reliable source is. If no independent reliable sources have written about your film, showing how it meets the special Wikipedia definition of a notable film, it cannot be written about on Wikipedia. Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about something. If you have further comment, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. Please also review conflict of interest. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) "Legends of the Multiverse is widely regarded as among one of the greatest film series ever made", but "Production will begin in 5 December 2021." I see why this draft has been described as a blatant hoax. Maproom (talk) 22:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Calculating and "fixing" Hubble's Constant using light speed (C) and Pi only.[edit] Is it possible to to use the following equation as a Hubble Constant value for reference purposes only on the Hubble Chart page? It is unique in the fact no measuring processes are involved, so accuracy of Hubble's Constant is as good as the inputted speed of light :-  2 X a Megaparsec X C, divided by Pi to the power of 21 =  71 Kilometres / Second / Megaparsec
 For this equation, a Parsec is the standard 3.26 light years. C is light speed in Kilometres / Second, and Pi is 3.142....... This equation "fixes" Hubble's Constant directly and precisely to light speed (C) and Pi. As this equation is original, there are no references, but it has been tested, and has successfully withstood many challenges since 2008. I am quite happy if it were used anonymously, due to the fact there are no references. The lack of external references was (rightly) the reason it was rejected as a stand alone article / submission. No copyrights are involved, as it is purely lifted from my work (Astrogeometry), and is not the work of anyone else I feel its anonymous inclusion on the Hubble Chart page would stimulate new interest in what has now become a "Hubble Constant stalemate". Sincerely, ClownBojo ClownBojo (talk) 22:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Interesting. The same theory was advanced several years ago here on Wikipedia by a user named David Michael Hine. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 22:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1057015446" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 22:36 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH Bonadea, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 Autoconfirmed user 2 Template:Uw-create-kept 3 Audio sample 4 How to create Article page for Musical Artist 5 section formatting 6 Citing Manga 7 Problem with visual editor 8 How can I remove a website from spam or black list? 9 Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page 10 Verify my article and undelete it 11 "Can you plz help" 12 Sandbox 13 Biology 14 Help moving my draft 15 Paw partol 16 Reaching a consensus 17 I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page 18 Why i cant see my name on wikipedia?? 19 Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps 20 pokemon showdown 21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath 22 I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ? 23 A Request to add Template to talk page 24 Is Imslp a good source to back up my information? 25 Vandalism 26 My Talk Archives vanished 27 Heading correction 28 Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search? 29 how do i seen how many edits i have 30 English 31 Science 32 Bold, Italics, or Quotes? 33 Visual Editing 34 Creating a page ethically 35 Text Allignment 36 Wiki Tables 37 Prime Healthcare 38 Disambiguation-links tag on redirects 39 Do anyone think like that? 40 Help with revision 41 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 42 new wikipedia page 43 What do you do on this page 44 Help writing a page 45 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 46 Ongoing Events Section 47 Rv tags 48 Reftoolbar 49 User level 50 Dead Links 51 Add (journalist) to title 52 Distracting AFC submission templates 53 Wikipedia:Tendentious editing 54 Wikipedia Markup 55 My Talk Page 56 Newcomers 57 IP blocking for 31 hours 58 Amkgp is Sock editing 59 Article Not Published - not adequate sources 60 Final Publish 61 How do I contribute images? 62 Creating Book Pages 63 ASIAN MONTH 64 What did I do wrong? 65 Calculating and "fixing" Hubble's Constant using light speed (C) and Pi only. 66 Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong? Most recent archives 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131, 1132 Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yep, @Patrick Vedel you should just close that and/or any other notes you might have and proceed to edit said article. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The sentences 2 - 5 are there in case they don't know about them. Faster than Thunder (talk) 06:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: & @Nick Moyes: thank you for guidance. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 07:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) How to create Article page for Musical Artist[edit]  Jasonseah69 (talk) 23:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69 Welcome to the Teahouse, and thank you for asking. Creating a Wikipedia article from scratch is the hardest task for anyone to achieve here - especially for a newcomer. Trying to write one about yourself is fraught with problems and issues, and will be seen as WP:PROMOTION. See our Conflict of Interest and AUTOBIOGRAPHY advice, too. But most of all, see WP:NMUSIC - this is a shortcut link to our essential Notability criteria for musicians. If you cannot find multiple, independent, in-depth sources that have written about you in detail (ignore your own PR output), and you don't meet any of the music notability criteria, then I'm afraid there's no chance. But if you feel you do meet those criteria, it's still best to leave it to someone who wants to write about you - not try to do it yourself. That person should then gain experience in editing here for some time, and then read This Guide on creating an article and submitting it for review through our Articles for Creation process, before it goes through our final 'New Page Review' process and is allowed to remain in the encyclopaedia. That's a brief outline of the process. Please do not attempt to use your Wikipedia WP:USERPAGE to write about yourself, or it will be deleted. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Good advice above. NB take "someone who wants to write about you" to mean "someone who, unprompted, wants to write about you". Not somebody asked (let alone paid) to do so. -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69: Welcome to the teahouse. You can create an article, or just submit using a draft for the Articles for Creation. However, if there aren't any sources, if may be deleted, so take your own risks for creating an article, or for less risks, create a draft. To create one, go to Wikipedia:Draft. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Severestorm28, please be aware that Jasonseah69 has only made three edits, is not autoconfirmed, and therefore cannot create an article directly. Also, their user page has been deleted as G11 - unambiguous advertising or promotion. Cullen328 (talk) 01:26, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cullen328: Next time-if someone is not autoconfirmed, and advertising, I'm giving them a warning. Thanks for the reminder. Severestorm28 (talk) 14:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) section formatting[edit] I had a draft reviewed and the reviewer suggested I use "==Section Formatting==". I cannot find any information on ==Section Formatting== on any of the help pages. Can someone send me a link which explains what ==Section Formatting== is and how to implement it? I appreciate the review and suggestions. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Looking at your draft, it's divided into headings using bold text titles, which isn't how articles are typically ordered here. If you replace the bold formatting on your section titles with two equals signs on either side, it'll create a more traditional section header for each title, which also then forces the page to create a table of contents and allows easier navigation. ??????? ? 00:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Thank You. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:47, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage COURTESY: Draft:Peebles Homestead You fixed that, but there are other problems. Several descriptive paragraphs have no references. Much of the content about his military service is general history, i.e., not about him (nor is it about the house). Hence, not relevant. David notMD (talk) 02:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) your draft has great promise. The section on the homestead today used one reference source three times, so I reformatted the citations so that the references are combined. You did a good job of finding references, can any of your sources be used for paragraphs that have no references? If not, where did you find the data about the house dimensions and construction details? If it was from a published source (such as a history book or local newspaper article) those can be used as a reference. Unfortunately, if it was from an unpublished source (such as handwritten notes found at a historical society) that would be considered original research and can't be used as a reference. You'll need to do some more work on your draft, but I'm sure it can be improved enough to be accepted. Keep up the good work. Karenthewriter (talk) 09:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Ownership gap between 1838 and 1994. David notMD (talk) 10:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Karenthewriter, Thanks for combining my multiple citations; I couldn't figure that out! The dimensions for the house (and other observations) came from me. I measured the house to see if the dimensions matched the 1798 Tax records, but I'm sure I can find them in other sources, especially the State Museum Survey. Also, I think the few sentences about Peebles' military record are relevant, because his military service adds credibility to the comment that the property could be eligible for the National Register. Without a notable person, places like Monticello and Montpelier would just be old brick houses. I could insert his military service elsewhere. Thoughts? Granted, Peebles service and the Cumberland County Militia could be separate articles which I can't do right now. I will clean up my citations. SharedHeritage (talk) 01:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @SharedHeritage: To answer your original question, see MOS:SECTIONS. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 05:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) I'm glad I could help with your multiple citations. I've been an editor since 2007 and I just recently mastered that skill. There's a lot to learn. As David notMD stated the information about Peebles military service isn't about the homestead you're writing about, so a reviewer might feel its unnecessary. (I'm not a reviewer, so I am no expert on that subject.) You mention Peebles received two different land grants. Did he receive any of his land due to his military service? If so you could state that, which would tie in the homestead with him being in the military. I live in northwest Pennsylvania, and some of the area's earliest settlers apparently received land because of their Revolutionary War service, so that's why I asked about the land grants. One thing you need to be aware of is that Wikipedia does not want any original research, or writers speculating on what happened. (To quote Sergeant Friday from the old TV show Dragnet – "Just the facts, ma'am.") So I'm a bit concerned about such phrases as "it is reasonable to believe that the windows are original..." and "The two front doors were likely replaced at this time," for that reads as though you are guessing or giving an opinion. You can quote someone and say that researcher Joe Smart-Guy believes the windows are original, and give a reference citation, but don't make it sound as though it's your conclusion. Remember that you're writing an encyclopedia article for the general reading public, and not trying to convince a historical commission to add the house to the National Register. I hope I'm not overwhelming your with details, but I'm aware that writing for Wikipedia means following Wikipedia rules. Best wishes on your research and writing project. Karenthewriter (talk) 05:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Manga[edit] Hi, I'm new to Wikipedia. I am currently trying to figure out how to add a small detail to a page about Kennedy Space Center in Pop Culture. I'm wondering how I should cite the manga volumes of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure for the details I need. Should I use a pre-existing source on Wikipedia to the volumes that links to the publisher's website, or should i use the ISBN and author info as my citation? Cheese420 (talk) 04:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Author, book title, place, publisher, year, ISBN, and page number, Cheese420. And perhaps additional info besides, such as details of the original publication. -- Hoary (talk) 05:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cheese420 I'm going to disagree with @Hoary here. For a WP-pop cult section, you don't cite the manga, you cite a WP:RS that noticed that the manga had the KSC in it and bothered to write something about it, like at least some of the films are mentioned at [1]. Anything in that section without a decent secondary source should be removed. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) That would be better, yes. (But I'd rather got the impression that that was a lost cause.) If a secondary source comments on the pop culture item and one can cite the former, wouldn't the listing be more informative if publication details of the pop culture item itself were supplied as well? -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I will not object to adding primary source as well, but personally I wouldn't bother. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Compare, for example, Death Note at Donald Trump in popular culture. Warning, the DT article has some scary stuff. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Shocking stuff indeed, Gråbergs Gråa Sång. Not least the revelation that "Trump has an article on the online encyclopedia Wikipedia." (Well I never!) -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I may have to disagree here too, that does seem the least shocking item to me ;-) Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Problem with visual editor[edit] When I edit wikitables using Visual Editor, the tools doesn't work, I'm trying to edit a text within the table but whenever I tap the wikitable, it goes lock. Can anyone help me? Anyone? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 05:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Could you tell us which table in which article you're trying to edit? The most common cause that I can think of is that the table's cells are created with templates instead of the usual table syntax, but I have to see the table itself to know. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:46, 22 November 2021 (UTC) In filmography table. After seeing this problem, I've tried to edit in other device, but still not working. Maybe only mobile user can experience this problem. The Visual editor was okay before, it works well, but it is not working now. It's not a template, it's wikitable, could you please help me, I can't edit using visual editor—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 12:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) The question you were asked was "which table in which article"? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Blp articles, or almost all articles that has wikitable. I'm using VE until now because of referencing. But using VE to edit wikitables, doesn't work when using a mobile. The VE is working properly before—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 13:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Please provide the specific name of one article where you are having this issue. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 05:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty: Try to look my sandbox, there is a draft article with a table there. I can't link specific article, because I'm having this problem in all articles that has a table, my example is my sandbox—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: I had no problem editing the wikitable on user:Ctrlwiki/sandbox with VisualEditor with my Windows 10 PC and Google Chrome. What hardware/software are you using? Are you using the Wikipedia app? Or are you using browser on your phone (in mobile view or desktop view)? What do you mean "it goes lock"? Could you please provide a screenshot of that situation? GoingBatty (talk) 15:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How can I remove a website from spam or black list?[edit] Hello I created a page in the sandbox and requested it to be reviewed. For this post, I used various sources, including a site, which I later found out it was blocked. Is it possible for me to request and remove the site from spam or blacklist? How? Also, is there a way to edit my written draft? AlexJan24 (talk) 06:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) hi AlexJan24! your draft is located at Draft:Bitumen penetration testing, feel free to input that in the search bar (including the Draft: prefix) to get to your draft. as for the blacklisted site, what source are you trying to use? theremay be a reason over at WP:RSP as to why it's blacklisted. if you want to add a whitelist for a page in there, you can hop over to MediaWiki talk:Spam-whitelist and request there to whitelist it for your article (but don't forget to read WP:Reliable sources first!). happy editing!  melecie  t - 06:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) thank you @Melecie! :) I want to use this URL: {infinitygalaxy.org/bitumen-penetration-test/} I am pretty sure that it has a good and reliable information. AlexJan24 (talk) 08:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @AlexJan24 This is a commercial website, and content like that is often placed on them to help promote their business and public perception. Can you not find something more academic and less dependent of one particular company? How about https://www.academia.edu/37842763/Penetration_Test_on_Bituminous_Materials ? Nick Moyes (talk) 10:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Nick Moyes, thank you for your suggestion! :) actually, the page you mentioned is good, but does not have the content I want. Moreover it is paid content not free. I am a petrochemical engineer. In fact, I have decided to write about such tests, which are very important and useful in the industry. As compared to other sites, I find this one to have more complete content. AlexJan24 (talk) 13:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page[edit] Hi guys I'm still feeling a bit lost. I have some factually updated text I would like to add to the BDR Thermea page. I have made my identity and intentions clear and being open, honest and upfront. There is no marketing-speak in the text. Please advise how I can place this new text. TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass: As said before, you should file an edit request on the talk page at Talk:BDR Thermea by following the instructions listed at {{Request edit}}. Even though you think the text is neutral, it may not be by Wikipedia's strict standards, so it'd still be better for more experienced editors to take a second look at it before it goes into the article. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 10:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass The best approach is to find the worst-offending sentences. For each one, create a new line and state: For [insert incorrect sentence here] please replace with ['insert better-worded sentence here] [add the url to a reliable source]. Then move on to the next issue and do the same. I fear you may have dumped a huge rewrite request on the talk page which I, for one, would not want to have to deal with. "Slowly slowly catchee monkey" as, I believe, they say. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Nick Moyes Thought I was making things easier for the editors! :) No harm intended. This is my thinking: Removed outdated text, updated facts and figures, and added a par on their new strategic focus. The company has undergone has lot of change since the original text was created. Have endeavoured to keep it short, sharp and factual and externally validated where I can. Still incorrect? I am no coder and find it really hard to navigate around Wikipedia. Sorry to be a bother but any help really appreciated.TracyMelass (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Verify my article and undelete it[edit]  Itswajidshaikh00 (talk) 11:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft_talk:Wajid_shaikh I see a draft whose text is "Hey team, i just created a page of living person autobiography with reliable sources and references citations kindly give me a hope to verifiy my new article". What I don't see is a biography of any kind. As for autobiographies, you're at the wrong website. -- Hoary (talk) 11:27, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have since been indefinitely blocked. You must succeed in appealing your block to have your account reinstated. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) FTR: Wikipedia:Sockpuppet investigations/Iwajidshaikh. --bonadea contributions talk 21:44, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Draft and article titles salted. Mjroots (talk) 11:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) "Can you plz help"[edit]  Priyanka9868 (talk) 11:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I HAVE TRIED SEVERAL TIME PUBLISHING CONTENT ON WIKIPEDIA BUT IT IS SHOWING PROMOTION CAN YOU PLZ HELP No need for capitals, Priyanka9868. Which article(s) or draft(s) are you asking about? -- Hoary (talk) 11:29, 22 November 2021 (UTC) This is the page Draft:Kapil Gupta — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868 (talk • contribs) 12:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Priyanka9868 Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about someone and their accomplishments. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about a person, showing how they meet the special Wikipedia definition of a notable person. Most of the sources in the draft seem to be interviews with the person, or simple biographical descriptions, not in depth, significant coverage of the person. Please see Your First Article. 331dot (talk) 12:14, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I quote the deleted draft: The company comes under IT Software ,Data Analytics , AI and IOT industries. At the very outset, OMLogic is not an marketing outsourcing company, but a strategic partner for your online marketing success. They offer a holistic “one-stop-shopping” solution for the internet marketing needs of clients. Within that, what does "strategic" add to "partner", what does "holistic" add to "one-stop-shopping", and why the "your" in "your online marketing success"? And Priyanka9868, you say that you have tried to publish this; but you have not. Or anyway "Priyanka9868" has not. Are you saying that you, Alex2321 and Sattu.pandey are all the same person? -- Hoary (talk) 12:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Also, are you related to Priyanka9868146? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) User:Alex2321 created the logo for CHES Special Risk that Priyanka9868146 used in Draft:CHES Special Risk. David notMD (talk) 15:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) No, we are not a same person. Actually he is one of my linkedin friend. I was not able to upload the logo of CHES Special Risk that why I have asked him to do so. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868146 (talk • contribs) 05:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Sandbox[edit] Hello is it possible to create an article if the first one you did has not yet been reviewed? how can I write on the sandbox if it only brings the draft I had done previously?Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Faith Buyaki, it is possible. Just create and use a new sandbox. You can do this by for example clicking on User:Faith Buyaki/sandbox 2 and using that. A different name is possible; just be sure that the name starts User:Faith Buyaki/. -- Hoary (talk) 13:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Biology[edit] Biologyassignments write briefly holozoic nutrition, parasitic nutrition, feeding mechanism in holozoic organisms. 105.112.176.163 (talk) 14:53, 22 November 2021 (UTC) We're not doing your coursework for you, and nor will the reference desks. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Holozoic nutrition exists as an under-referenced, Stub article. David notMD (talk) 15:40, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Help moving my draft[edit] Hi, I have created a draft, Draft:Angel Heredia, that I think is ready for review. Angel Heredia is already a Wikipedia page, so could someone with the needed rights move the draft to Draft:Angel Heredia (soccer) before I submit it for review? Thank you in advance! 73.162.91.15 (talk) 16:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you submit your draft for review and it is accepted, the reviewer will place it at the proper title. You may wish to leave a note on the draft talk page explaining the titling issue, though. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I went ahead and moved the draft (per Wikipedia:Naming conventions (sportspeople)#Association football (soccer)) to make it easier on the reviewer. DanCherek (talk) 16:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Paw partol[edit] Can someone help with gross of paw patrol the movie as acorrding to box office mojo it at $130M[1] 92.236.253.249 (talk) 17:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt11832046/  Courtesy link: PAW_Patrol:_The_Movie RudolfRed (talk) 18:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC)  Done by Clpo13. GoingBatty (talk) 05:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reaching a consensus[edit] Hello, after many failures, I have explained why my edits should be accepted. Please share your opinion on these pages: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock Centrereded (talk) 17:41, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Centrereded. Your edits create the impression that your goal on Wikipedia is to make Marcelo Claure and Hans Georg Näder look bad. Cullen328 (talk) 18:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded: Reaching a consensus on an article talk page is much more difficult if the text that's proposed is long and consists of many sections. It is very unlikely that you will get a consensus in favour of what essentially amounts to "please restore all my edits", especially since the text you proposed to add is not quite neutral in tone. You received some very good advice and explanations of how the process works here; please take some time to read that and start a discussion about which specific points you think should be added to the article. Well-sourced criticism of individuals and companies can certainly be included in Wikipedia articles, but it has to be added in a neutral manner, and considering what is due weight. --bonadea contributions talk 20:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I also have no interest in the topics, but did see many comments that proposed refernces were not considered Wikipedia reliable source, and a general sense of 'piling on' rather than neutral point of view and appropriate length. You have been hammering at these articles since at least July, with for example, an attack-toned draft Draft:Hans Georg Näder. Why this deep and persistent interest in a draft and an article about German and Bolivian businessmen, respectively? David notMD (talk) 21:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 19:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @ACtiling, List of people from Merseyside? It's not locked or anything, you can edit it. Only add people that has a WP-article, preferably with a reference that supports that they belong on that page, see WP:TUTORIAL on how to add references. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:13, 22 November 2021 (UTC) WP:ADVENTURE can also be useful as an intro to Wikipedia. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You are on the verge of being blocked from making any edits to List of people from Merseyside. At the Administrators' Incidents board: "This is a newish editor, who is solely focussed on making changes to one article - List of people from Merseyside. They probably mean well. However, I have never before come across an editor who is so unable to listen to advice on basic editing skills - for example, they appear to believe that it's only possible to add a name to the list while removing one at the same time. They have been repeatedly advised, and occasionally warned, by several editors on numerous occasions, and directed to places like WP:Teahouse, but appear to be completely unable to comprehend what makes an edit allowable, and seem unwilling to learn. I would far prefer that they were not blocked but rather improve their skills - but sheer inability to achieve a modicum of competence appears to be an unresolvable problem. Any advice?" At issue, SPECIFICALLY, is that you are removing existing names for no valid reason, then inserting new names, but not consistent with the alphabetical order of the list. Stop removing names. Being a person from the past is not a valid reason to remove a name. Do not remove names. Stop removing names. REALLY. Or be blocked from ever editing this article again. David notMD (talk) 21:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Why i cant see my name on wikipedia??[edit] I have acted in a Bollywood movie as an lead actress, why i cant see myself on Wikipedia’s page 43.248.70.167 (talk) 22:07, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you meet the Wikipedia definition of a notable actress, you might merit an article, but it is strongly advised that you not attempt to write one yourself, see autobiography policy. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps[edit] Arbitrary merge to another page. Argonne was one of the only 13 founding corps of Drum Corps International in 1972. An editor (with no drum corps background) arbitrarily merged this page into a defunt D & B page. Argonne should hold it's own page because of it's historical significance. Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Argonne73. Please stop edit warring: that is regarded as disruptive, and may get you blocked. We get that you believe that there should be a separate article about Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps; but several experienced editors have disagreed with you, and nobody (including you) has argued for its retention at WP:Articles for deletion/Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps. Wikipedia works by consensus: if you think a change should be made (or not be made) it is up to you to persuade other editors according to Wikipedia's policies. A core policy is notability: it is not enough for a subject to be "of historical significance" (or popular, important, famous, influential or several other characteristics which would contribute to notability out in the world): in Wikipedia we use the word in a special sense, which mostly comes down to "are there enough reliably published sources, wholly independent of the subject, and containing significant coverage of the subject, to base an article on?" Several editors have expressed their opinion that the existing article does not establish this. If you want the article retained it is up to you to persuade other editors that there are adequate sources to establish (which means, finding such sources) that it meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. --ColinFine (talk) 22:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) pokemon showdown[edit] how do i find pokemon showdown ifo here DMPenguin (talk) 00:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) DMPenguin (talk) there is one sentence about Pokémon Showdown in the "Fan community" section of the Pokémon article. If you are able to find good published references about Pokémon Showdown you can expand the article's coverage on that topic. Karenthewriter (talk) 00:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi DMPenguin! there's also a small section on rules used by smogon, the community(?) that hosts pokémon showdown over at Pokémon_competitive_play#Smogon if you want to check that or help over there. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:56, 23 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath[edit] Hi there - can someone help me with my inline citations / footnotes? I am putting up my first wiki page submission and have feedback to improve this area - but unsure what else i need to do to meet criteria. Feedback on my new page appreciated: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath Claire Leaf (talk) 03:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Three points. First, an index number ("<ref> ... </ref>") comes immediately after a comma, period, etc; not before it. Secondly, you can (and most drafts should) reuse references: ("<ref name="XYZ">full details</ref>" for the first instance, "<ref name="XYZ" />" for each subsequent instance, where "XYZ" is something distinctive). Thirdly, for any reference, you format a link something like this Author, "[https://www.example.com/blah.blahblah/blah.html Title of the web page]", Website, date. Retrieved date. -- Hoary (talk) 03:14, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Claire Leaf. Please read Referencing for beginners. There are many techniques for creating useful references. What they all have in common is that uninformative bare URLs are not displayed, but instead text based references are displayed, which include all of the relevant bibliographic details of the reference. Things like title, author, publication or publisher, date of publication, page numbers, ISBN numbers for books, and the like. Cullen328 (talk) 03:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I fixed some of the references, but in doing so, discovered that the draft as submitted is a close paraphrasing of reference #2: https://leafie.org/seizurerescuebreath/. Reword, so that the text is in your own word rather than sentences verbatim. As for the refs I did not fix, the above link shows how to convert URLs to valid refs. There remains one other problem that may b insurmountable. Wikipedia requires that for health articles, refs meet criteria described at WP:MEDRS. The refs you have do not appear to be sufficient, i.e., not review articles of multiple clinical trials. David notMD (talk) 03:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ?[edit]  Ayaelmelegy (talk) 04:06, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Ayaelmelegy, I took a quick look at the first of these. It has 13 references, but there's no indication of which of the 13 is a reference for which part of the draft. Additionally, each of the 13 is just a "bare URL". Please see the section immediately above for how to improve the references. -- Hoary (talk) 04:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Second one, drafts also URLs. David notMD (talk) 05:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) A Request to add Template to talk page[edit] As a new Wikipedia user, I always wondered how to add Template like example NoACEMM to a User talk. Moreno Ardan1 (talk) 3:18, 23 November 2021 FYI?– Removed duplicate signature As the message on your talk page suggests, you can just add {{NoACEMM}} to your own talk page. Templates usually belong to the top of talk pages. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:25, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is Imslp a good source to back up my information?[edit] Ok so I want to edit Dolores Paterno because it says there that the original lyrics were in Spanish and translated by Levi Celerio which is not true because the original sheet music from 1880 already had Tagalog lyrics and Levi Celerio added another version of lyrics.(since the original song was published before Levi was born) I don't know other sources but the sheet music in Imslp.com that explains this. Isangtaosamundo (talk) 08:28, 23 November 2021 (UTC) In your place, I'd (i) add {{Dubious|date=November 2021}} immediately after the sentence The lyrics were translated from Spanish into Tagalog by the Filipino National Artist Levi Celerio; and (ii) raise the matter on Talk:Dolores Paterno. In the latter, give your reasons for saying that it's not true. I'm unfamiliar with imslp.com; in its current state, I have to say that it looks like mere junk. Can you perhaps retrieve an earlier, reliable version from the Wayback Machine? If so, give the title and URL of the relevant page. Feel free to cite other reliable sources (books, journals) even if they haven't been reproduced on the web and aren't downloadable. -- Hoary (talk) 10:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism[edit] Hi, I wanted to know the precise difference between blatant and subtle vandalism. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:34, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! basically subtle vandalism is vandalism where there is an attempt to make it seem real or otherwise hide it from others, for example changing a date to "21 April" which may seem real until further inspection instead of something obviously fake such as "420 January" such as the case with blatant vandalism. other such cases are, from the page linked, are adding plausible misinformation to articles (such as minor alteration of facts or additions of plausible-sounding hoaxes), hiding vandalism (such as by making two bad edits and reverting only one), simultaneously using multiple accounts or IP addresses to vandalize, abuse of maintenance and deletion templates, or reverting legitimate edits with the intent of hindering the improvement of pages. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a bunch @Melecie. But still I want some help. Can you tell me what type of vandalism the two edits are in page Warfaze, which I reverted moments back. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) it may be one of those edits that fall in between, like if you understand bengali it would probably be visible that it's an attempt at vandalism, while if you don't it could be understood as an attempt to add something constructively to a page.  melecie  t - 10:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Yeah so the language matters. Any way that you @Melecie. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Archives vanished[edit] I went to my own Talk to archive discussions, only to see that my previously created archives have vanished. Any idea what happened? David notMD (talk) 11:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Nevermind. Tracked it down to a self-inflicted deletion of "Talk header"" months ago. David notMD (talk) 11:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Heading correction[edit] How do i correct a spelling on the heading? i added an unwanted letter on the heading and need to remove it . How do i do it.  11:19, 23 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by ChabbieCee (talk • contribs) ChabbieCee, you edit a regular heading (such as "Heading correction" for this thread) just as you edit other text. As for the titles of articles or other pages, you need to "move" a page to its new title. So if you realize that the name you want for Ms Nerwande is Elisabeth (with an "s"), you view the page User:ChabbieCee/Elizabeth Nerwande, click on the option to move it, specify User:ChabbieCee/Elisabeth Nerwande, give your reason for the move, and say (i) yes you want to move any talk page there may be (if there's no talk page, no matter), and (ii) yes there should be a redirect from the old name to the new one. -- Hoary (talk) 11:42, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search?[edit] I created a draft about a dance collective called FlucT Draft:FlucT. When I do a search for "fluct" on Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?search=fluct&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go&ns0=1, the draft doesn't show up. This concerns me because I fear someone else may start an article on FlucT not realizing there is already a draft. Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen To search for a draft, you must put "Draft:" in front of the draft title. Keep in mind that users are not under any obligation to first search for a draft if they want to directly create an article. I have added the submission template to your draft so you can submit it. 331dot (talk) 11:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) 331dot thanks, I probably understood that. I just wonder if it's a good policy, because some editors may not know they have to put draft: in front, miss my draft, create their own draft, then there seems to be a duplication of effort that feels needless? Greg Dahlen (talk) 13:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Greg Dahlen, and welcome to the Teahouse. You can always open a discussion on this sort of issue at the Village pump. But in my view there are good reasons for the way it is. The Wikipedia that the public sees is six million encyclopaedia articles: nothing else. That's all that is indexed by external search engines, and that's all that the Wikipedia search box gives you unless you tell it otherwise. All the rest - talk pages, drafts, user pages, projects pages, policies, essays, etc, are "under the bonnet", seen only by those who choose to look inside. --ColinFine (talk) 13:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Greg Dahlen: There is actually a clever feature which makes it unlikely anyone would accidentally start a second draft with exactly the same name as one that already exists. If you go through all the steps to begin a new article called "FlucT" by typing that in the search box, choosing the option to "Search for pages containing FlucT" and then clicking on the red link in the search output page where it says "You may create the page "FlucT", but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered." you'll find that the newly created page will have a big banner at the top saying "There is a draft for this article at Draft:FlucT." You can confirm this by clicking on the redlink I placed in this answer, which cuts out all the searching and will now go straight into draft creation mode when clicked. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:18, 24 November 2021 (UTC) how do i seen how many edits i have[edit] how do i see how many edits i have thanks DMPenguin (talk) 13:05, 23 November 2021 (UTC) By clicking this link. -- Hoary (talk) 13:23, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DMPenguin. Just in case you're wondering where the link that Hoary mentioned above can be found, just go to your user page in in the left-hand sidebar click on "User contributions" in the "Tools" section. Then, scroll all the way down to the very bottom of the page and click on "Edit count". That's where you'll find the aforementioned link. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:30, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I go to the little toolbar (Talk, Sandbox, Preferences, Beta, Watchlist, Contributions, Log out) that's to the left of my username, which is above any Wikipedia article I'm viewing when logged in. I click on Preferences and my number of edits is shown. That's what I see on an aging Mac laptop, when using Safari as a browser, but you may see something different on your computer. Karenthewriter (talk) 17:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) English[edit] What is a tea house? 41.114.234.36 (talk) 13:32, 23 November 2021 (UTC) On Wikipedia it is a friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia. Theroadislong (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Science[edit] How do you make a tealeaf 41.190.245.5 (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. This is intended to be a friendly place for getting help in using and editing Wikipedia: for general knowledge questions, the reference desk is a better place; or often, you can look at one of our six million articles, such as tea processing. --ColinFine (talk) 14:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Bold, Italics, or Quotes?[edit] I'm writing my first ever article from scratch, albeit I've written essays for practically empty existing articles many times before, so I know what I'm doing. One thing I'm never sure about however, is when to use bold, italics and "quotations." Although I know that "quotations" are used on songs. I'm at one of those situations now, while writing about some early appearances of a former footballer turned rapper. I'm mentioning and referencing a few of the Youtube channel's he appeared on, but as they don't have Wikipedia articles like SB.TV, Mixtape Madness, Link Up TV and GRM Daily do, I'm wondering whether I should put the channel names in bold, italics or "quotations"? Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Can I have an answer please? Danstarr69 (talk) 21:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Sorry you didn't get a reply until now. I guess all our volunteers were busy! We have a 'Manual of Style' which should help you (see WP:MOS), or visit WP:BOLD; WP:ITALICS and WP:QUOTATIONS for detailed guidance. Avoid using bold in articles anywhere except the first sentence to highlight the subject, and possible later on the first use of another term that is synonymous with the page title. Bold should definitely not be used to highlight YouTueb channel names or anything else. Use italics sparingly, for things like scientific names, and use quotation marks only when you actually quote something a person genuinely said (quote it verbatim), followed by a citation to prove that they said it in that exact form. Don't make quotations very large chunks of text, and don't insert song lyrics which will probably be copyright and be instantly removed. Does that answer you now? Nick Moyes (talk) 22:53, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I'm not sure. I've just had a quick look at the articles and the Style Manual seems to help a bit. However the Be Bold article you linked doesn't seem to mention anything about when to use Bold text. And the Italics and "Quotations" articles don't look much use either, especially as the "quotations" thing isn't what I was talking about. When you mention a song, you put the song title in quotation marks like this "Song". Basically what I'm saying is... Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a website/Youtube channel which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a film/TV show which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a music mixtape/EP/LP/album which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention relevant business which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention an award ceremony and its categories which don't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a person who doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Etc etc. Here's an example paragraph, with some of the things mentioned: John Smith collaborated with Jim Smith on the song "Wikipedia is Great." The music video for "Wikipedia is Great" was released on the Youtube channel Wikipedia TV. He then released his album titled Wikipedia: Greatest Hits which won a Wikipedia Award for Best Album. The Wikipedia Awards were broadcast on BBC One. Danstarr69 (talk) 23:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Very recently I learned about MOS:TITLEABSENTBOLD and would recommend not worrying too much about the infinite rules. I'll admit I don't have an ironclad rule for italics/quotations, but whatever decision you go with, consistency within the same article is key. Sometimes certain topics have their own writing guidelines/styles tied to a specific region/grammar set. Generally bold text guidelines are defined in MOS:BOLD, not to be confused with the philosophy of WP:BOLD EDITING. Someone else will help you if need be. Thank you for the question and happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Shushugah Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Text formatting#Italic type From reading the Italics bit in the above link, it basically looks like I should use Italics whenever I want to emphasise something in the middle of a sentence, unless it's a song of course, as I already know that those are highlighted with "quotation marks." Danstarr69 (talk) 00:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Indeed! A fourth scenario that wasn't mentioned. Whether a tangentially related Article exists or doesn't exist, has no impact on whether it should be boldened/italicized or quoted. You may decide depending on its usefulness make a WP:BLUELINK for existing articles, and a WP:REDLINK for non existing articles that have strong potential to become one. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 00:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Visual Editing[edit] Hi, can anybody out here tell me how I can visually edit a table, as in this page. I could figure out how I can add a new row below a specific row, but could not figure out how to change the sl. no of all the following rows, after adding a new row. I could now answer the edit request on that talk page, not only because I could not do it, but because the edit request had not provided relevant details. Anyway, can anyone please tell me the procedure of doing it. For example, consider the following. I want to add a new row after 7th row. And add new details. So what is the procedure, using visual editing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible It's a two step process, involving both Visual Editor and Source Editor. I have copied the source code from the article into my Sandbox as it's too risky playing around with tables directly - and especially as this is just a demo. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 (Note that my edit summary links to the source page where the authors are credited - do this even in your sandbox please, as we need to credit other people's work when we upload it, as it isn't really ours to claim as our own) You'll see I have added my very own, well-known and highly-popular YouTube Channel to a newly inserted row at position 8. You should do that bit most easily in Visual Editor by Selecting Row 7, clicking the Chevron button that appears on the far left of the table and selecting Insert below. Now type in all the information/data that you can, obviously numbering this as Row 8. Ignore the fact that text is not aligned, you'll fix that in the next step. Now save your edits (Publish Changes) then go back in, but via Edit Source so that you're editing the wikimarkup.Do not use VE. Find the row with the newly added data. (Tip: use Ctrl-F to search for my surname, so you're taken straight there.) Find the line containing the position number '8' that you added. It will look likethis: |8 Copy and paste the style command from an existing centred cell and paste it in so it looks like this: | style="text-align:center" |8 Preview it to check it's centred, and repeat elsewhere as necessary. For flags and so forth, find an exisiting row contining what you need and paste that in to the empty cell (also within Source Editor, not in VE) Finally, you will now have to manually edit every subsequent row so that the row number shifts up one to accommodate the newly-inserted row. (You cannot do this automatically as you might using Excel.) It should take you just a few minutes to fix this. I stopped at fixing this at row 20, which is why there are two rows numbered 20 in my demo. Again, don't use VE for this step. Please visit this Help page to appreciate what you can do in Visual Editor and all its limitations. You can't, for example, change colours with VE - you must use source editor. The 1st line of that section I linked to mentions a 'Phabricator' list of tasks to improve VE. Follow it to appreciate what can and can't yet be done. See https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T108245 Whilst you might be frustrated that you can't do everything in Visual Editor, just remember that this tool was devised to make basic editing simpler and more WYSIWYG for beginners. Experienced editors generally tend to avoid Visual Editor and prefer using Source Editor. You are now asking about very complex editing, where either only Source Editor or a combination of both editing tools will be necessary. I hope this all makes sense. Please ping me know when you've done with the stuff in my Sandbox, and I'll then delete the content from it. Nick Moyes (talk) 16:49, 23 November 2021 (UTC) PS: Another little tip for you: Enter as much data as you can in VE. If you can't add what you want, leave some placeholder text like aaaa bbbb ccccc etc in its place. This make it much, much easier to find the right cell to edit late in Source Editor/wikimarkup. Cheers, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:54, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I really don't have words to thank you man. You just helped me beyond imagination. I really did not imagine, you would use your precious time in writing so much for me. I read this page. But could not find any help. But see, you gave me the the necessary page, which has the right information. But I could not find it myself - so foolish. I just sometimes tend to wonder, how some Wikipedians, know about every help page in Wikipedia, and have explored every nook and corner of Wikipedia. They know the exact help pages, for the exact problem, and they know which help page has that needed information. For example see, the page that I was looking into, and the page that you gave me. Such a difference. I thought I might get help from the Visual Editor help page, but you gave me the actual page which has the information that I need, the Help:Table page, under the VE section. Although both the pages may seem to have the same kind of information, but it is a huge difference. And see you also left me a PS: and gave me your great tip. Yes, in that way, it is really easy to find out. Thank you again for helping me learn Wikipedia, and with all the elder Wikipedians' kind help, I am learning so fast. Thanks again. Have a nice Wikipedia career. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes But I cannot figure out one thing, while writing the name of the channel I wrote Itcouldbepossible, but wikipedia is thinking it to be a page, and in the preview section, I see that it is writing like [1], which it thinks to be a link, for further reference you can see that in your sandbox. While yours is not looking like mine. Can you figure out and tell me what is wrong with me. I am always getting confused. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:03, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible The only think "wrong with you" is your wonderful fascination in some of the minutae of Wikipedia. Nerdiness is an asset here, as is a desire to ask questions and to learn. I only hope you then put what you're learning into practice. That's why I was willing to spend time answering someone's technical questions (even though I'm no expert on tables at all - or indeed much else, if I think about it!) The best way to learn from one's errors is first to accept that one must have made a mistake, and then to keep analysing the problem until you suddenly go ahah! that's my mistake. You never forget those types of mistakes, and that's how we learn through life. Although not normally encouraged, I give you permission to go into that section of my sandbox and make an edit there to show me the problem you're encountering. I'm not 100% sure what you're seeing. My link was actually a wikilink to the Teahouse, modified to display my name. (In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity, but might not on yours. A red link is to a page that doesn't exist, whether it's an article page, a user page or something else. The link you've just pasted above was to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/En.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible If you had put it as an external link (using one square bracket), it would look like this: [2] Both would not work becaue you accidentally repeated the en.wikipedia.org elements. You actually needed https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible as an external link, though that would not be appropriate for a table. This also works: Itcouldbepossible - I forced the User: bit to not display by putting a vertical pipe character at the end. Now I think you asked somewhere else about how we learn all this stuff. Watching, reading, doing and making mistakes. It's taken me 10 years of editing to pick up the stuff I'm now happy to share with you, but I was quite able to do most of the basic editing (apart from tables - they're really scary!) after quite a short time. I worry a bit that you're wanting to "run before you can walk", but I hope I've now managed to answer all your various questions. Good luck! Nick Moyes (talk) 11:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes, you are answering all my questions to my content. And you were saying about putting into use what I am learning. Yes, I am doing that. For example when I copied the table from your sandbox to my new tables sandbox, I wrote from whom I have copied the table. What I am wanting to say is that for example I want a wiki link to my talk page, which would show up like "Itcouldbepossible", using the vertical pipe (|) character. Then why cannot I do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very simple. [[User talk:Itcouldbepossible|Itcouldbepossible]] renders as Itcouldbepossible. For help on wikilinks, see Help:Wikilinks. --David Biddulph (talk) 12:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks, that was what I was wanting to do from the beginning. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible If you edit the source to this thread and look at my reply above, you should see exactly how I did it. The alternative is still to use the vertical pipe after your username, but to add different text (either your own name without the User: bit) or as I did when linking you to Albert Einstein! You'll work it out. Nick Moyes (talk) 12:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thank you, I wanted to tell you this from the very beginning. But you could not understand it, anyway, thank you for all the other help that you provided. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Also I want to know how I can turn by wiki redirects to green as you said here - In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:26, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Is it possible to mask external links to read the way I want. I mean Wiki links can be renamed as the editor wishes, is there any way in which external links can be masked, or is it at all possible? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating a page ethically[edit] Creating a page for my boss My boss is adamant that she wants a Wikipedia account (she's a prominent science communication researcher). I think she probably deserves one, but I'm also deeply aware that I'm biased as a prospective page author. Does anyone have any advice for me? I want to make my boss happy, but not by violating Wikipedia guidelines. Lorikie (talk) 14:26, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: You'll need to read and abide by Wikipedia:Conflict of interest. DuncanHill (talk) 14:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lorikie, and welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for being up-front about your situation. Unfortunately, there are some formidable obstacles in the way of you being able to satisfy your boss. As Duncan says, you need to read up about conflict of interest, and further, you need to make the formal declarations that you are a paid editor (it doesn't matter if you are specifically paid to do this, from what you say it is part of your job). Next, you need to drop the idea of "deserving a page", because that assumes that a Wikipedia article is in any way for the benefit of its subject. Of course many people (and other entities) do get some benefit frrom there being a Wikipedia article about them, but that is incidental: Wikipedia has no such purpose, and indeed is indifferent as to whether the subject wants an article about them or does not want an article about them. An article about your boss will not belong to her, will not be under her control, will not necessarily say what she wants it to say, and should be based almost entirely on what people wholly unconnected with her have chosen to publish about her (good or bad!) and not on what she or her associates say or want to say. You might like to show her an article about yourself isn't necessarily a good thing. The counterpart of "deserve" that Wikipedia actually uses is, "does the subject meet Wikipedia's criteria for notability? This is not directly related to prominence, importance, influence, popularity, or any of the other things that you might normally connect with "notability": in essence it is a question of whether there are enough reliably published sources, wholly unconnected with the subject to base an article on. If you and she decide that you still want there to be an article, there are more hurdles. Creating a new article is much more difficult than it looks - I liken it to building a house as your first building project, or playing a public recital after your first violin lesson, and always advise new editors to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" and how Wikipedia works. Editors who do not heed this advice often have a frustrating time as they put in a lot of work and don't understand why their house keeps falling down. Having a conflict of interest you will likely find it even harder, as you will need to basically forget everything you know about your boss, and summarise only what those independent commentators have published. If you decide to go ahead, you need to read your first article, and then use the articles for creation process to create a draft. --ColinFine (talk) 14:57, 23 November 2021 (UTC) If pressed to proceed by your boss, see if there are three or more published articles about her - content at length, not just a name-mention - and then use guidance at Help:Referencing for beginners to create references in proper ref format in your Sandbox. If you cannot find publications about her, then the effort is futile. David notMD (talk) 15:52, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: Is your boss by any chance Laura Lindenfield? If so, I think that you will have a very difficult time finding the sources you'll need for a draft article on a living person in which each and every statement has to have a reliable reference. When I Google her name, I get a number of sources but they are virtually all based on interviews (or are on websites clearly linked to her), so are not WP:INDEPENDENT. The nearest I can find that might be OK is this one at science.org which probably reaches the WP:SIGCOV for notability (specifically in her case WP:NACADEMIC) but still seems, by using language like "She is passionate about...", to take a tone that Wikipedia would not use (see WP:NPOV). Your best bet, I think, is to draft a very short article using such independent sources and then not be too disappointed if the Draft is declined: that will at least prove you have tried! Make sure you start by complying with the mandatory disclosures described at WP:PAID. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Text Allignment[edit] Any idea on text alignment in table. I want to center align some text in tables, using visual editor. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:44, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible I think you'd probably need to use wikisource code for that, using the "text-align:center; parameter. PS: I've tweaked the demo warning you placed on your sandbox page as you'd left the nowiki commands in which stop it from working. So the warning now looks like it's come from me, but obviously isn't a real vandalism warning. The best way to leave warnings is to enable WP:TWINKLE in your Preferences. Then it does it automatically for you via menu options, plus a whole lot more. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thanks for the edit. I know it is not a real vandalism warning. It is just my sandbox. If I had done something wrong, then you would have told me in the talk page. But anyway to get to the point, I have already TWINKLE enabled. I used it to start delete discussions, and got myself blocked for being thought to be a sockpuppet, since that page was created by another sock, and the sock with whom the checkusers thought me to be linked had edit warred with the previous sock. Anyway thats not the point. What you are saying is that it will give me warnings. Can you specify what warning, or what type of warnings??? Also it would be really kind of you, if you could tell me in a more precise way of how to use wikisource code, suddenly while I am writing in normal language. For example I am using "text-align:center" here, but nothing is happening. Please tell me the way, to center text in a table while using visual or source editor. Thanks for the answer, and regards. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible As I replied to you on my sandbox, it's important that you are editing tables and complex entries in WP:Source Editor not Visual Editor. Did you follow my instructions on how to switch between them, and did it work? You will get nowhere with anything other than the simplest of tables if you stick to VE. The parameter I mentioned above is wiki markup - as written with Source Editor. So, go to the table I put in my sandbox for you at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 Click 'Edit Source' next to the heading to open the section in Source Editor. (Tell me if that function is not showing, as it means you've not forced it to display via your personal Preferences setting. My default is for it to offer me both editing tools all the time - it should be yours, too, especially if you're working on tables.) Search for the word 'center' and you'll see 101 examples - one controlling each cell of data. Regarding WP:TWINKLE: Go to your own userpage. Use the drop down menu box marked 'TW' to access the Twinkle menu. The first sub-item is WARN. This opens a menu box for you to explore the various options. Try leaving yourself a first level warning against vandalism, then a second, and then a third. I can't explain all the options here for you - we expect editors to very carefully' learn for themselves how to use these powerful tools (which can easily upset other users). So read the TWINKLE page and the accompanying Documentation to understand what it can do. But it covers most of the common issues of edit waring, content removal, addition of uncited content, harassment, conflict of interest, spamming, plus single issue notices like encouragement to use edit summaries, biting newcomers, etc etc. There is a complete list of warning templates (here). Nick Moyes (talk) 10:33, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes the edit source function is showing. Also I thought that you were telling me of editing error warnings, so I asked what type of warnings. I had pasted that warning in my sandbox just to see how it looks. I knew how to use twinkle. For the table related thing, I want to know where should I place "text-align:center; parameter? I have made my edit on your sandbox. You can see that, and tell me if it is right or wrong. You will see that the table I created, it has some errors. For the channel name column I thought of adding my talk page and then renaming the wiki link as "Itcouldbepossible". But it showed up like this: ([3]) - why??? While your wiki link it redirects it to the teahouse it shows Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel? How come??? Why cannot I edit my wiki link to show my username, while on clicking it redirects to my talk page. For example yours show Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel and it redirects to WP:TH Why is mine not like that?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 11:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Tables[edit] Today I was editing random articles, when I came across Nach Baliye. I was reading the article, trying to find for any errors, when I came across this table [4]. I just sort of went mad seeing this table. Just a well formatted and advanced table, with all the color schemes, and just nice cell merging. Can anyone, for heaven's sake tell me how that table was created with all those attractive features. I don't really think that the Wiki markup was typed out. There must be some modern graphical interface, for doing such a tedious thing. I want to know how that table was created. I would really be glad, if I get the answer from someone who is an expert in this matter, and has been editing Wikipedia for a couple of years, because, I want the exact and precise method of creating such a table. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:58, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I've been editing for over 10 years and wouldn't dare to create such a thing. I have, however, created very long data tables by starting in Excel, getting all the sorting, the text and the wikilinks and in the right places before exporting it with a tool to Wikimarkup. But I'm not aware of a tool to make tables look pretty like that - so I shall await for answers from other users more experienced in such things, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: It takes work, often over time with improvements by different editors, often starting with copying the format from another page. The first similar table in the article was added by an IP here with edit summary "added table like other shows Jhalak". That may refer to Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart or an earlier season. It could maybe be tracked further back but I haven't tried. Help:Table has general help but it's complicated. Much of it is the same or similar as HTML tables which some editors already know. PrimeHunter (talk) 16:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @PrimeHunter Yes, but how did that specific table appear in Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart. How was it created??? And also I wanted to know one thing, how on Earth did you find that specific page history, when the table was added?? I have seen many people doing so. Is their anyway of finding out when a specific edit was first made, and the what edits followed?? I really don't think that you flicked through the page history. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible There are various ways to find when an edit was first made. The slow way is to look at 500 edits in View History at a time. Let's assume that covers the entire history (if not, just increase the number to 5000 in the url bar), then you can find a rough midway point, click (and note down) the date you clicked. Is the edit showing there? IF yes, go down and divide the lower half of edits into half again, and select another date to click. Is the edit there? If 'No', then it will have been made between those two date points. Divide the edits roughly in half again and then again until you find the first one where that edit was made. Doing this in conjunction with looking at View History (green numbers are positive count of bytes added/red are negative overall additions) makes this just a few minutes work. It took me just a few moments to do that for Nach Baliye, speeded up by using Ctrl-F to search for 'Scoring Chart', of which there were 823 mentions in the edit summaries. I went to the lowest one, then scrolled down a dozen or so edits further and found a massive addition by an IP on 9 March 2019 with a very helpful edit summary. Job done. Of course, that's the slow way. For simplest way to find when a short text string was first added to an article is to copy it, then go to the View History tab. Just above all the row entries, click Find addition/removal to use the 'WikiBlame' tool. Be aware that by default it only searches 500 of the latest edits before the date selected. So it will miss the first addition of text if it's a very heavily edited page as this one is unless you spend time to understand how to take advantage of the tool's searching features. I wouldn't use it to search for a chart being added, but I might focus on just one unique element or keyword in that chart. Hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks, I learnt a new thing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 10:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the answer. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Prime Healthcare[edit] My interest in CAlifornia health systems drew me to Prime Healthcare, where I was struck by the difference in how Wiki editors handle the material. Whereas large systems such as Sutter and Kaiser are given the opportunity to list history, background, hospital names, etc, Prime's editing history is aggressive and heavy handed. The result is a page listing controversy and nothing else. Prime owns 45 hospitals nationwide, employs 50000 people, but you wouldn't know it by Wiki. BTW I am in no way affiliated or compensated by Prime; my research is for a graduate program. I'm just amazed at the discrepancy and poor treatment. I haven't researched it enough to determine whether sources should be improved on deleted materials, but that is different than what edit history shows. Any attempts to improve the page are immediately deleted wholesale, in apparent violation of Wiki editing rules. (I attempted to undo some edits myself) Can anyone explain this? Prime owner Prem Reddy has made a number of enemies with his handling of labor, etc. Is that at play here? Archie515 (talk) 16:46, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Prime Healthcare Services Karenthewriter (talk) 17:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Archie515. Welcome to the Teahouse! You can discuss the issue about the content of the article on the article's talk page. The concerned editors might engage in the conversation and help you in finding a possible solution. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 17:24, 23 November 2021 (UTC) thanks but page monitors refuse to allow access and have not responded to talk page requests in the past. Now locked out from making any changes to sources. Page is an embarrassment to all Wiki contributors. Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC)Archie515Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The Controversy section is well supported by reliable published sources. It's Prime Healthcare that should be embarrassed. Maproom (talk) 23:04, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Archie515: I see you posted twice at Talk:Prime Healthcare Services. The last piece of advice you were given there was to make a specific request. I suggest you think about the worst problem with the article, and then post a specific detailed suggestion on the talk page, such as: Please change the current article text "_____________" to "_____________" based on the independent reliable source found at ___________________. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Disambiguation-links tag on redirects[edit] In this edit I intentionally changed a redirect from targeting an article to targeting a disambiguation page. To my surprise, the "adding disambiguation links" tag was added. In a way, it makes sense (I added a link to a disambiguation page), but on the other hand, the tag is probably meant for when someone adds a link in an article without knowing it's a disambiguation page, like if I added a link to Georgia or Mercury in an article. Can something be changed so that this tagging isn't activated when the end result of the edit is a redirect? I reported this at WP:EF/FP but was sent here for a reason I don't understand: the responding editor said both that the tag isn't activated and that it's working properly. 72.77.45.188 (talk) 17:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The edit filter (which interdicts edits) is separate from the tagging system (which describes what an edit is). —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 17:38, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Do anyone think like that?[edit] Are there people actually thinking that this page represents a universal and unbiased point of view? Owerthise (talk) 18:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I think like that. It doesn't seem biased to me. What direction do you think it's biased in? Maproom (talk) 18:43, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think there is such a thing as an universal point of view, certainly not about a topic connected to religion. It looks neutral to me; it may not be perfect (no article is) but there are no obvious problems. --bonadea contributions talk 19:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Owerthise: Welcome to the Teahouse! If you have a specific suggestion to improve the article, please post it on Talk:Muhammad with a reliable source and the {{edit extended-protected}} template, and another editor will review your request. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Help with revision[edit] Hello! I'm trying to revise the first two paragraphs of the Cultural context section of Cueva de las Manos and I need help with it. I've already put in a copy edit request for the whole page with the Guild of Copyeditors, but I was wondering if there was a group/person willing to help with this particular section in the meantime. I'm trying to revise the section in accordance with the following advice of FunkMonk in the talk page: There is some repetition in how you describe the paintings were returned to and were influential for the people throughout many thousands of years, perhaps check if someone of it can be consolidated or made less similar. If anyone would be willing to lend a hand in this respect it would be much appreciated. If there is a better place to ask for such help, I would be grateful if someone could point me there. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Best, Tyrone Madera (talk) 18:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) This might be better for the Talk Page, but one possible way to consolidate this might be to write this instead, which combines two separate statements: However, that so many people contributed to the artwork for thousands of years suggests the cave held great significance for the artists, with earlier groups influencing later ones through a continuous narrative, playing out over millennia. But that's just one possibility. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 18:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing this Ayaelmelegy (talk) 22:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Ayaelmelegy, and welcome to the Teahouse. I'm afraid there is quite a lot you need to do before that draft is publishable. The things that caught my attention are: Remove all the links to interviews. There are restrictions on the use of External links in articles, and in any case Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. Format all the references so that a reviewer can readily evaluate which of them are likely to be most reliable and independent. See REFB, and WP:NONENG. With you anonymous URLs it is hard to see whether your draft establishes that she meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. Remove all the evaluative language. No article should ever describe anything in Wikipedia's voice as "one of the most important" or "much needed". I get that you strongly approve of Hamdy's work, but none of that must come out in the article: it must be a neutral summary of what the independent sources say about her - and if there is criticism, then you should probably summarise that too. (You can quote a source that described something as "important" or "much needed" but you need to make sure that it is a source which is wholly unconnected with the subject). Please also see WP:NOTSOAPBOX. --ColinFine (talk) 23:12, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I did some edits would you please check them? Thank you — Preceding unsigned comment added by Ayaelmelegy (talk • contribs) 00:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) new wikipedia page[edit]  2600:1700:9C80:62E0:89ED:2A1E:FE48:ACD3 (talk) 22:08, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome. If you want to create a new article(not a page), that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content. If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Unregistered users(as well as new accounts) cannot directly create new articles. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) What do you do on this page[edit]  Jenay Ava (talk) 22:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Jenay Ava Welcome to the Teahouse. What we do is welcome new users and assist them with any problems they may encounter whilst editing Wikipedia. We recognise that it can be a steep learning curve to begin with, so we try to make that journey a little smoother for you in the hope that you will stick around and become one of our many regular contributors. Unfortunately, looking at your very first few contributions, I fear you think Wikipedia talk pages might be like a chat forum. They are not, and all we do here is help build the worlds greatest online encyclopaedia, and use the talk pages to assist us in that task. You'd be most welcome to help with this undertaking (6.2 million+ article in English so far), but this place is not a social media chat site. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:40, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Help writing a page[edit] I have the page written and now need to post to wikipedia, I have akk the references. Please help, FletcherEmma (talk) 23:37, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @FletcherEmma welcome to Tea House!. If you want to create a new article, that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content.If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. I have been editing the errors on Draft:Gehad Hamdy for while. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing? Thank you. Ayaelmelegy (talk) 00:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, some things need to be improved: (1) the article must have a lead portion (the introduction should not have a heading), (2) there should not be no links or Arabic letters in section headings, (3) there is too much text in the infobox, and Arabic text isn't needed there. There are other things, but you can start with this. Regards. — Alalch Emis (talk) 00:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) STATUS: Draft nominated for Speedy deletion and creating editor blocked as suspected sock (denies). David notMD (talk) 01:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have overhauled (Major Cleanup) the article (This specifically). Jairus is doing... ?? 02:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ayaelmelegy: Draft:Gehad Hamdy has no references in the "Biography" and "Speak Up" sections. Please add more independent reliable sources to your draft before submitting for AfC. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 06:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) GoingBatty, "Ayaelmelegy" got an indefinite block six hours before your last (and of course well-intentioned) message. -- Hoary (talk) 12:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Ongoing Events Section[edit] What happened with the ongoing events section on both the desktop website and the mobile website? It used to be a nicely categorized, bulleted set of news. But not it's just hyperlinks to specific wikipedia pages. I would use the previous style daily, it was a wonderful source for news. I wonder if there is a good reason for removing it, or if it was potentially even an oversight. Regardless I loved that feature and don't want to lose it :( 47.229.202.202 (talk) 01:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Are you confusing Portal:Current events/Sidebar and Portal:Current events? Both are linked from "In the news" on Main Page, on "Ongoing" and "Other recent events". PrimeHunter (talk) 02:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Rv tags[edit] Hello. Is it possible to remove tags? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Possibly - which tags were you considering removing, and why? GoingBatty (talk) 06:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty, no, I've no reason, I've seen some users who edit without any tags. So I asked. Can the tags be removed without any reason? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: When tags are removed from an article, it's assumed that the problems they highlight have been resolved. If an editor feels that a tag was removed prematurely, they'll add it back at their own discretion. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Tenryuu, I didn't tell about the tags of article. I told about editing tags such as "2017 wikitext editor". Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 07:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: There is a difference between Wikipedia:Tags and Wikipedia:Templates I see you removed the {{under construction}} template from the Carlos Moguel Jr. article in this edit, but you cannot remove the tag "2017 wikitext editor" from the edit. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 07:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Those are not removable. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reftoolbar[edit] How to change the date format for Reftoolbar? from Dmy to mdy. Thanks. —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Welcome to the Teahouse! It appears that there is a discussion about this at Wikipedia talk:RefToolbar#Date formats. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) User level[edit] Hi, I wanted to know how I can add a user level. I mean there will be a bar on my user page, and it will fill up as I edit articles. And beside it would be written, my next user level. Any idea on how to do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Here's a workaround, Itcouldbepossible. Just edit articles, constructively. Soon you will be "extended confirmed". Most people are, and few people will be surprised or much interested to know that you are. There are some other very minor superpowers that you can acquire; but again, few people will be interested. Some superpowers are a bit out of the ordinary, and you might want to advertise one or other of these; on the other hand, advertising them may seem somewhat vulgar. Best is to aim to be an article-improving Clark Kent. -- Hoary (talk) 11:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible Welcome to Tea House! As @Itcouldbepossible stated, it's rarely of interest to anyone else. This essay on WP:HATCOLLECTING could be useful on the mostly harms/some benefits of gamifying your user page with statistics. I do indulge myself with Wikipedia:Service awards as a way of marking specific tiers of editing. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 12:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Dead Links[edit] I see that many pages have something called 'dead links'. What are these so called 'dead links', and how can I make them alive again?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) For information about dead links, read WP:Dead links. --David Biddulph (talk) 09:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks again for the answer Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Add (journalist) to title[edit] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anshuman_Tiwari Can you write this in brackets as journalist because it is journalist? You can write Journalist in back of their name in brackets. Coolblack4 (talk) 10:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Coolblack4, and welcome to the Teahouse. We use a term in parenthesis like that in an article title only when it is necessary to distinguish between different people (or other subjects) with the same name. See WP:Disambiguation. --ColinFine (talk) 11:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Something drastic certainly should be done to this article. Sample: In digital journalism, he has created and successfully established an innovative and exclusive multilingual digital first content vertical moneybhaskar.com for Danik Bhaskar Group, DB Corp. It is the largest Hindi business portal and offers guidance, utility and wisdom based jargon free economic-business and investment content to aspiring readers in Hindi. (For one thing, I wonder what is being excluded.) -- Hoary (talk) 12:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Distracting AFC submission templates[edit] Does anyone know how to collapse or get the "this topic is not notable" AFC submission templates out of the way? I'm trying to work on a draft article, and they're distracting and take up about half of the page. wizzito | say hello! 12:43, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Those templates were put there for the benefit of reviewers, and of anyone who might want to work on improving the draft. You should not remove or collapse them. That's why they all say "Do not remove this line!" Maproom (talk) 13:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thing is, they are INCREDIBLY distracting to look at, I at least want to move them to the bottom at the page if I can't collapse or make them invisible. I just can't have them taking up 90% of the page from the top, it bothers me a lot and prevents me from working. wizzito | say hello! 13:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Reality shifting has been Declined three times and Rejected twice. I have restored the Declined and Rejection and Comments to the top of the article, where those belong. David notMD (talk) 14:23, 24 November 2021 (UTC) If you believe you can rescue this with better references, do so, but be aware that Rejected drafts are likely to be deleted and 'salted.' Make sure you have an off-Wikipedia copy. And understand that 'salted' means that an Administrator's approval would be needed to try again to create a draft on this topic. David notMD (talk) 14:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there seriously no way to get these to the bottom of the page (where they are still visible) or make them look less distracting? Your comments aren't helping me, sorry. Also, I am still working on the article; I had to rewrite it from scratch because the original user who created the draft made it look very bad and had bad formatting and grammar. (Also, they kept resubmitting it multiple times despite not addressing the concerns, I haven't submitted it yet.) It isn't anything speedy deletable (see Wikipedia:Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity), there's a Washington Post report and a scholarly article on the subject, but probably just needs to be worked on and more RS might need to be made before it gets published. wizzito | say hello! 14:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Declines and Rejections are considered a required part of draft history, so that the next reviewer can check if the weaknesses identified by previous reviewers have been addressed. Given that you have taken over a draft created and edited by other editors, you can leave a Comment to that effect with the other Comments. David notMD (talk) 14:39, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there no way to at least move it to a part of the page where it's visible by people contributing and reviewers, but not as distracting as a glob that takes up the first part of the page? If not, I may just have to move it to my userspace and work on it from there. wizzito | say hello! 14:42, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David notMD noting for the record I have reverted you; @Wizzito offers up a convincing reason why they moved them down, because it was distracting for them, and as long as they move them back up before resubmitting I see no issue with that move. That is ignoring the question whether or not these templates are relevant at all considering the rewrite currently ongoing, although it appears that at least some of the original text still exists. -- Asartea Talk | Contribs 15:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have added a Comment that you are in the process of completely revising the draft. Do as much as you can before submitting. I know nothing about the topic, but will mention that as it stand now, the lead is over-referenced. Pick at most three refs to support the Lead. Those refs and the others may be used in the body of the article, as more detail on history, reception, criticism, etc. is added. David notMD (talk) 14:47, 24 November 2021 (UTC) That's because I was working on it, putting the references in so I can use them later, and then delete the ref in the lead when I've finished reviewing the source and using it to source statements. You act like a draft should have the same standards as mainspace, and besides, I moved it to userspace anyways so I can work on it. wizzito | say hello! 14:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You didn't move it, you copied & pasted the content, so please read about copying within Wikipedia. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I want to pitch in from an outside editor. 5 declined templates, 2 separate comments, and 1 draft template? I know if I was unaware of all Wikipedia policies, this would feel very WP:BITEy to me. Is there not a better solution, in the form of an {{articlehistory}} style template? I understand why the need for all the notices (for future reviewers to know at a glance), but there can be so many better ways to do this now. --JackFromWisconsin (talk | contribs) 14:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I feel like a lot of people in this thread are being BITEy too... wizzito | say hello! 15:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My intention was to proffer advice on how to create a draft that is more likely to be accepted. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I understand, but I feel as if my questions weren't answered and were just met with a "don't do this" or "don't do that" and reverts. wizzito | say hello! 15:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Tendentious editing[edit] This is not marked as an essay. This is also not marked with the green symbol for policy, guidelines pages. So, how important are these types of guideline pages? Knight Skywalker (talk) 12:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very important. It's a supplementary explantion to the guideline WP:DE, and carries the same status. Mjroots (talk) 13:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Mjroots: If this is very important, then why Wikipedia is not including the green symbol in the box? --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I didn't use the bold format, but still the above lines are showing as in bold to me. --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You used the bold format by putting a semi-colon before the colon at the start of the line. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I've fixed the bold. Mjroots (talk) 16:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) This page is not one of Wikipedia's policies or guidelines, as it has not been thoroughly vetted by the community. Also it has category. Wikipedia essays (?) (±) Knight Skywalker (talk) 17:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Markup[edit] Is there any introduction page, or help page, or user guide page for Wikipedia Markup. If there is then please provide me. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Itcouldbepossible, you may be looking for Help:Wikitext. DanCherek (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks for the Wiki Help page, I am surely going to read it. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Page[edit] As you see now, my talk page has become a little clumsy. What is the way to make it clean? Should I archive them or is there any other option? Seeking for options. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: While you're allowed to delete conversations from your own talk page, archiving is recommended because it makes it more convenient for you and other editors to find those old conversations in the future. There are a few different ways to archive a talk page – you can do it manually or have a bot help you – and there is more information about each of those at Help:Archiving a talk page. DanCherek (talk) 14:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek I have archived the archival messages left by a bot on my talk page and have shifted them here. But I cannot move the three notification to three different headings, it is coming under a single heading. Please can you help me in that respect. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The first section starts with {| so you need to end it with |}. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Newcomers[edit] How, can I find all newcomers on Wikipedia??? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:08, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: You can find them at Special:Log/newusers but for what purpose ? 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA (talk) 15:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) IP blocking for 31 hours[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… I hope you don’t mind me asking this question: When administrators impose a block on IP addresses for the first time, the length of the block is usually 31 hours (1 day, 7 hours). Do you have any idea why administrators chose this value? Thanks. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 15:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC). It's so that they don't just wait 24 and return to the same things. 31h is also a standard length in the blocking dropdown menu and has been since before I was an admin. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Imagine a kid messing around in study hall, causing a school's IP to be blocked. A 24-hour block would allow him or her to come back the next day during the same period to cause more trouble. Deor (talk) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Amkgp is Sock editing[edit] Hi, first I was blocked on the ground of thinking to be a sockpuppet, and the sockpuppet investigation was raised by an ipv6 ip 2402:3A80:6E1:9A2E:A110:65A0:5AD7:4F15. The sock investigation page is here. In the Clerk, CheckUser, and/or patrolling admin comments section Blablubbs commented and said The filer is obviously Amkgp loutsocking. I blocked them for a bit. Then after the block expired then again another comment was added by ipv6 user 2402:3A80:1A4E:9197:C5B8:CED1:C0FD:9A1D, and then blablubbs blocked the ipv6 again. When it was proved that I am not a sockpuppet, this ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:A17E:9C61:AA1F:59E2:32A2 came and added welcomed me. Till date, I could not understand anything, why an ipv6 was coming an leaving me messages on my talk page. Today again an ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA came and gave me a vandalism warning on an edit that I made two articles namely, Piet van der Sluijs and Dré Saris, where I had only added a more reference needted tag using twinkle. It was my mistake or not is a far matter, but then he leaves me another link to learn wikipedia in under an hour link. He also answers one of my questions in the teahouse. The thing is all these ipv6 start with 2402:3A80, and blablubbs has stated previously that it is block evasion of sock amkgp. Now what is to be done? Should I raise a sockpuppet investigation request?? Would it be possible to block just huge range ipv6s? Please give me suggestion in this matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 16:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Also in there sockpuppet investigation page [[5]] we can see that the suspected sock puppets ipv6 also starts with 2402:3A80. We can also see that he got blocked because he used to edit logged out for a couple of time, and he was blocked for that reason. And also in a further section we see that he also used or uses 2409:4061::/36 this ipv6 range. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Itcouldbepossible (talk • contribs) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Article Not Published - not adequate sources[edit] Hi, I am trying to publish an article about a triceratops skull nicknamed 'Dragon King' which was sold last year which is the biggest skull ever found, but the article was rejected due to a lack of sources. The sale was private so there wasn't a lot of press generated, but what there was is referenced. The skull is definitely the biggest in the world. How would I go about validating that? Would an image of the skull with dimensions count? What could I use to validate it. Any suggestions would be very welcome. I should make clear that I have no financial stake in this at all, it is simply a fact that the skull is the biggest found and I think should be public information. Maudjohnson90 (talk) 16:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Maudjohnson90 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Wikipedia articles summarize what publicly available independent reliable sources say about a topic. If a topic is not sufficiently covered in such sources, it cannot be on Wikipedia. Documents in private hands or otherwise not available to the public cannot be used as sources here. Did no sources cover this sale, or its discovery? If some did, but not enough for a standalone article, there may be an existing article this could be mentioned in. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Shouldn't you first put any reliable information at Triceratops#Size, Maudjohnson90? That's a pretty well-watched article and if you think that particular skull needs another full article, you could discuss that on the Talk Page at Talk:Triceratops Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:59, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks Mike Turnbull! I have added information under Triceratops#Skull and that has remained since I added it. I'll discuss on the Talk Page as suggested. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Maudjohnson90 (talk • contribs) 17:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Final Publish[edit] Hello Sir, how much time does it take for the draft to get finally published ? Thank you. Johnalphanso (talk) 17:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You have not created nor submitted a draft to Articles for Creation. Is there a particular draft you are interested in? — Preceding unsigned comment added by David notMD (talk • contribs) 18:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Johnalphanso, and welcome to the Teahouse. There is no simple answer to your quewstion: a draft takes as long to be published as it takes. There is no queue, no schedule, no deadline: all editors are volunteers, and work on what they choose when they choose. If you're talking about Draft:Sanskar Desai, that will not get reviewed until it is submitted for review (add {{subst:AFC/draft}} to the top). But it will not get accepted until somebody follows Theroadislong's advice in the comment and removes all the unreliable sources from the list. It will likely not get accepted until somebody reformats the references from a useless list of URLs to a meaningful set of citations - see CITE. There are probably other things that need improving too: in particular, the question of whether it has been worked on by a paid editor. --ColinFine (talk) 18:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How do I contribute images?[edit]  Bettertoseeit (talk) 19:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Bettertoseeit Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please review WP:UPIMAGE carefully. It's not as easy to do as it may appear. You must be autoconfirmed(account is four days old with 10 edits or more) to upload images yourself, but you can visit Files for upload to get assistance with doing so if not autoconfirmed. 331dot (talk) 19:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating Book Pages[edit] Hello. One of the reasons I became an editor was an interest in filling some of the gaps in bibliographies I am familiar with. What I'm unsure about is if an author has a large bibliography with Wiki articles already created for most of their books (for example; Stephen Baxter bibliography), am I safe in assuming I can create pages for those novels which do not have an article, or might the lack of an article be for a reason? Thanks in advance. John Bullock (talk) 20:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Such novels still have to be independently notable. Ruslik_Zero 20:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Jbullock83 Welcome to Tea House! In general, a notable author does not mean their books are automatically notable and vice versa, see WP:NOTINHERIT, however in the book specific Wikipedia:Notability (books) guidelines, it does mention certain famous authors' books are likely to be automatically notable. Anything by Jane G. Austin for example, but another editor may disagree. Looking at specific notability criteria for the books themselves would be the most forward process. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 20:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the info/reply! Ruslik, Shushugah. John Bullock (talk) 21:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) ASIAN MONTH[edit] i would like to ask if my translated ( not fully complete article counts for the ediathon asian month in order to get a postcard Georgekagian (talk) 21:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian Welcome to Tea House! Your question is better asked on Wikipedia talk:Wikipedia Asian Month/2021 but if you add {{WAM talk 2021}} to the talk page of said article, a WikiProject judge will determine its eligibility for you. I doubt a full translation is needed, since each article can be independently edited anyways. It needs to comply with English Wikipedia WP:5 Principles whereas it may differ in other languages. Thank you for the question and happy editing! Good luck with the edit-a-thon! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 21:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian, looking at here, it looks like it counts unless it was a pure machine translation (e.g. Google Translate) that you didn't copy edit to correct any errors. {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 21:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) What did I do wrong?[edit] I'm the guy who created the article for Legends of the Multiverse: Draft:Legends of the Multiverse, just wondering why you rejected it? LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. The reason for the decline(not rejection) was left by the reviewer at the top of the draft. Do you have specific questions about it? 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) In short, your draft seems to have no sources. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The fan film does not have any progress on the production yet, why do you expect it to be full of sources? Sources will only be added during production. (also i'm new here on wikipedia so i don't know what exactly are sources) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Please review what a reliable source is. If no independent reliable sources have written about your film, showing how it meets the special Wikipedia definition of a notable film, it cannot be written about on Wikipedia. Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about something. If you have further comment, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. Please also review conflict of interest. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) "Legends of the Multiverse is widely regarded as among one of the greatest film series ever made", but "Production will begin in 5 December 2021." I see why this draft has been described as a blatant hoax. Maproom (talk) 22:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Calculating and "fixing" Hubble's Constant using light speed (C) and Pi only.[edit] Is it possible to to use the following equation as a Hubble Constant value for reference purposes only on the Hubble Chart page? It is unique in the fact no measuring processes are involved, so accuracy of Hubble's Constant is as good as the inputted speed of light :-  2 X a Megaparsec X C, divided by Pi to the power of 21 =  71 Kilometres / Second / Megaparsec
 For this equation, a Parsec is the standard 3.26 light years. C is light speed in Kilometres / Second, and Pi is 3.142....... This equation "fixes" Hubble's Constant directly and precisely to light speed (C) and Pi. As this equation is original, there are no references, but it has been tested, and has successfully withstood many challenges since 2008. I am quite happy if it were used anonymously, due to the fact there are no references. The lack of external references was (rightly) the reason it was rejected as a stand alone article / submission. No copyrights are involved, as it is purely lifted from my work (Astrogeometry), and is not the work of anyone else I feel its anonymous inclusion on the Hubble Chart page would stimulate new interest in what has now become a "Hubble Constant stalemate". Sincerely, ClownBojo ClownBojo (talk) 22:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Interesting. The same theory was advanced several years ago here on Wikipedia by a user named David Michael Hine. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 22:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong?[edit] But the movie is overall just an idea from my mind, I'm actually making this movie with my two best friends. So technically, I wouldn't call it a "hoax" since it's actually coming to YouTube. Did you even read the entire article? If you don't want an article related to my fan film in this site, where else do I put it? (p.s. irrelevant question: do you like the idea of my fan film trilogy?) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) "where else do I put it?" Facebook, maybe. Maproom (talk) 22:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Yes, Wikpedia is not for people to tell the world about what they do. When the New York Times or CNN or BBC write about your film, then someone independent of you will write an article about it. Until then, you will need to use social media. 331dot (talk) 22:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1057017307" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 22:53 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH GoingBatty, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 Autoconfirmed user 2 Template:Uw-create-kept 3 Audio sample 4 How to create Article page for Musical Artist 5 section formatting 6 Citing Manga 7 Problem with visual editor 8 How can I remove a website from spam or black list? 9 Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page 10 Verify my article and undelete it 11 "Can you plz help" 12 Sandbox 13 Biology 14 Help moving my draft 15 Paw partol 16 Reaching a consensus 17 I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page 18 Why i cant see my name on wikipedia?? 19 Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps 20 pokemon showdown 21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath 22 I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ? 23 A Request to add Template to talk page 24 Is Imslp a good source to back up my information? 25 Vandalism 26 My Talk Archives vanished 27 Heading correction 28 Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search? 29 how do i seen how many edits i have 30 English 31 Science 32 Bold, Italics, or Quotes? 33 Visual Editing 34 Creating a page ethically 35 Text Allignment 36 Wiki Tables 37 Prime Healthcare 38 Disambiguation-links tag on redirects 39 Do anyone think like that? 40 Help with revision 41 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 42 new wikipedia page 43 What do you do on this page 44 Help writing a page 45 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 46 Ongoing Events Section 47 Rv tags 48 Reftoolbar 49 User level 50 Dead Links 51 Add (journalist) to title 52 Distracting AFC submission templates 53 Wikipedia:Tendentious editing 54 Wikipedia Markup 55 My Talk Page 56 Newcomers 57 IP blocking for 31 hours 58 Amkgp is Sock editing 59 Article Not Published - not adequate sources 60 Final Publish 61 How do I contribute images? 62 Creating Book Pages 63 ASIAN MONTH 64 What did I do wrong? 65 Calculating and "fixing" Hubble's Constant using light speed (C) and Pi only. 66 Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong? 67 Re: Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong? 68 Fair use Most recent archives 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131, 1132 Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yep, @Patrick Vedel you should just close that and/or any other notes you might have and proceed to edit said article. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The sentences 2 - 5 are there in case they don't know about them. Faster than Thunder (talk) 06:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: & @Nick Moyes: thank you for guidance. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 07:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) How to create Article page for Musical Artist[edit]  Jasonseah69 (talk) 23:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69 Welcome to the Teahouse, and thank you for asking. Creating a Wikipedia article from scratch is the hardest task for anyone to achieve here - especially for a newcomer. Trying to write one about yourself is fraught with problems and issues, and will be seen as WP:PROMOTION. See our Conflict of Interest and AUTOBIOGRAPHY advice, too. But most of all, see WP:NMUSIC - this is a shortcut link to our essential Notability criteria for musicians. If you cannot find multiple, independent, in-depth sources that have written about you in detail (ignore your own PR output), and you don't meet any of the music notability criteria, then I'm afraid there's no chance. But if you feel you do meet those criteria, it's still best to leave it to someone who wants to write about you - not try to do it yourself. That person should then gain experience in editing here for some time, and then read This Guide on creating an article and submitting it for review through our Articles for Creation process, before it goes through our final 'New Page Review' process and is allowed to remain in the encyclopaedia. That's a brief outline of the process. Please do not attempt to use your Wikipedia WP:USERPAGE to write about yourself, or it will be deleted. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Good advice above. NB take "someone who wants to write about you" to mean "someone who, unprompted, wants to write about you". Not somebody asked (let alone paid) to do so. -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69: Welcome to the teahouse. You can create an article, or just submit using a draft for the Articles for Creation. However, if there aren't any sources, if may be deleted, so take your own risks for creating an article, or for less risks, create a draft. To create one, go to Wikipedia:Draft. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Severestorm28, please be aware that Jasonseah69 has only made three edits, is not autoconfirmed, and therefore cannot create an article directly. Also, their user page has been deleted as G11 - unambiguous advertising or promotion. Cullen328 (talk) 01:26, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cullen328: Next time-if someone is not autoconfirmed, and advertising, I'm giving them a warning. Thanks for the reminder. Severestorm28 (talk) 14:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) section formatting[edit] I had a draft reviewed and the reviewer suggested I use "==Section Formatting==". I cannot find any information on ==Section Formatting== on any of the help pages. Can someone send me a link which explains what ==Section Formatting== is and how to implement it? I appreciate the review and suggestions. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Looking at your draft, it's divided into headings using bold text titles, which isn't how articles are typically ordered here. If you replace the bold formatting on your section titles with two equals signs on either side, it'll create a more traditional section header for each title, which also then forces the page to create a table of contents and allows easier navigation. ??????? ? 00:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Thank You. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:47, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage COURTESY: Draft:Peebles Homestead You fixed that, but there are other problems. Several descriptive paragraphs have no references. Much of the content about his military service is general history, i.e., not about him (nor is it about the house). Hence, not relevant. David notMD (talk) 02:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) your draft has great promise. The section on the homestead today used one reference source three times, so I reformatted the citations so that the references are combined. You did a good job of finding references, can any of your sources be used for paragraphs that have no references? If not, where did you find the data about the house dimensions and construction details? If it was from a published source (such as a history book or local newspaper article) those can be used as a reference. Unfortunately, if it was from an unpublished source (such as handwritten notes found at a historical society) that would be considered original research and can't be used as a reference. You'll need to do some more work on your draft, but I'm sure it can be improved enough to be accepted. Keep up the good work. Karenthewriter (talk) 09:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Ownership gap between 1838 and 1994. David notMD (talk) 10:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Karenthewriter, Thanks for combining my multiple citations; I couldn't figure that out! The dimensions for the house (and other observations) came from me. I measured the house to see if the dimensions matched the 1798 Tax records, but I'm sure I can find them in other sources, especially the State Museum Survey. Also, I think the few sentences about Peebles' military record are relevant, because his military service adds credibility to the comment that the property could be eligible for the National Register. Without a notable person, places like Monticello and Montpelier would just be old brick houses. I could insert his military service elsewhere. Thoughts? Granted, Peebles service and the Cumberland County Militia could be separate articles which I can't do right now. I will clean up my citations. SharedHeritage (talk) 01:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @SharedHeritage: To answer your original question, see MOS:SECTIONS. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 05:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) I'm glad I could help with your multiple citations. I've been an editor since 2007 and I just recently mastered that skill. There's a lot to learn. As David notMD stated the information about Peebles military service isn't about the homestead you're writing about, so a reviewer might feel its unnecessary. (I'm not a reviewer, so I am no expert on that subject.) You mention Peebles received two different land grants. Did he receive any of his land due to his military service? If so you could state that, which would tie in the homestead with him being in the military. I live in northwest Pennsylvania, and some of the area's earliest settlers apparently received land because of their Revolutionary War service, so that's why I asked about the land grants. One thing you need to be aware of is that Wikipedia does not want any original research, or writers speculating on what happened. (To quote Sergeant Friday from the old TV show Dragnet – "Just the facts, ma'am.") So I'm a bit concerned about such phrases as "it is reasonable to believe that the windows are original..." and "The two front doors were likely replaced at this time," for that reads as though you are guessing or giving an opinion. You can quote someone and say that researcher Joe Smart-Guy believes the windows are original, and give a reference citation, but don't make it sound as though it's your conclusion. Remember that you're writing an encyclopedia article for the general reading public, and not trying to convince a historical commission to add the house to the National Register. I hope I'm not overwhelming your with details, but I'm aware that writing for Wikipedia means following Wikipedia rules. Best wishes on your research and writing project. Karenthewriter (talk) 05:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Manga[edit] Hi, I'm new to Wikipedia. I am currently trying to figure out how to add a small detail to a page about Kennedy Space Center in Pop Culture. I'm wondering how I should cite the manga volumes of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure for the details I need. Should I use a pre-existing source on Wikipedia to the volumes that links to the publisher's website, or should i use the ISBN and author info as my citation? Cheese420 (talk) 04:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Author, book title, place, publisher, year, ISBN, and page number, Cheese420. And perhaps additional info besides, such as details of the original publication. -- Hoary (talk) 05:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cheese420 I'm going to disagree with @Hoary here. For a WP-pop cult section, you don't cite the manga, you cite a WP:RS that noticed that the manga had the KSC in it and bothered to write something about it, like at least some of the films are mentioned at [1]. Anything in that section without a decent secondary source should be removed. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) That would be better, yes. (But I'd rather got the impression that that was a lost cause.) If a secondary source comments on the pop culture item and one can cite the former, wouldn't the listing be more informative if publication details of the pop culture item itself were supplied as well? -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I will not object to adding primary source as well, but personally I wouldn't bother. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Compare, for example, Death Note at Donald Trump in popular culture. Warning, the DT article has some scary stuff. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Shocking stuff indeed, Gråbergs Gråa Sång. Not least the revelation that "Trump has an article on the online encyclopedia Wikipedia." (Well I never!) -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I may have to disagree here too, that does seem the least shocking item to me ;-) Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Problem with visual editor[edit] When I edit wikitables using Visual Editor, the tools doesn't work, I'm trying to edit a text within the table but whenever I tap the wikitable, it goes lock. Can anyone help me? Anyone? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 05:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Could you tell us which table in which article you're trying to edit? The most common cause that I can think of is that the table's cells are created with templates instead of the usual table syntax, but I have to see the table itself to know. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:46, 22 November 2021 (UTC) In filmography table. After seeing this problem, I've tried to edit in other device, but still not working. Maybe only mobile user can experience this problem. The Visual editor was okay before, it works well, but it is not working now. It's not a template, it's wikitable, could you please help me, I can't edit using visual editor—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 12:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) The question you were asked was "which table in which article"? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Blp articles, or almost all articles that has wikitable. I'm using VE until now because of referencing. But using VE to edit wikitables, doesn't work when using a mobile. The VE is working properly before—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 13:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Please provide the specific name of one article where you are having this issue. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 05:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty: Try to look my sandbox, there is a draft article with a table there. I can't link specific article, because I'm having this problem in all articles that has a table, my example is my sandbox—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: I had no problem editing the wikitable on user:Ctrlwiki/sandbox with VisualEditor with my Windows 10 PC and Google Chrome. What hardware/software are you using? Are you using the Wikipedia app? Or are you using browser on your phone (in mobile view or desktop view)? What do you mean "it goes lock"? Could you please provide a screenshot of that situation? GoingBatty (talk) 15:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How can I remove a website from spam or black list?[edit] Hello I created a page in the sandbox and requested it to be reviewed. For this post, I used various sources, including a site, which I later found out it was blocked. Is it possible for me to request and remove the site from spam or blacklist? How? Also, is there a way to edit my written draft? AlexJan24 (talk) 06:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) hi AlexJan24! your draft is located at Draft:Bitumen penetration testing, feel free to input that in the search bar (including the Draft: prefix) to get to your draft. as for the blacklisted site, what source are you trying to use? theremay be a reason over at WP:RSP as to why it's blacklisted. if you want to add a whitelist for a page in there, you can hop over to MediaWiki talk:Spam-whitelist and request there to whitelist it for your article (but don't forget to read WP:Reliable sources first!). happy editing!  melecie  t - 06:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) thank you @Melecie! :) I want to use this URL: {infinitygalaxy.org/bitumen-penetration-test/} I am pretty sure that it has a good and reliable information. AlexJan24 (talk) 08:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @AlexJan24 This is a commercial website, and content like that is often placed on them to help promote their business and public perception. Can you not find something more academic and less dependent of one particular company? How about https://www.academia.edu/37842763/Penetration_Test_on_Bituminous_Materials ? Nick Moyes (talk) 10:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Nick Moyes, thank you for your suggestion! :) actually, the page you mentioned is good, but does not have the content I want. Moreover it is paid content not free. I am a petrochemical engineer. In fact, I have decided to write about such tests, which are very important and useful in the industry. As compared to other sites, I find this one to have more complete content. AlexJan24 (talk) 13:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page[edit] Hi guys I'm still feeling a bit lost. I have some factually updated text I would like to add to the BDR Thermea page. I have made my identity and intentions clear and being open, honest and upfront. There is no marketing-speak in the text. Please advise how I can place this new text. TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass: As said before, you should file an edit request on the talk page at Talk:BDR Thermea by following the instructions listed at {{Request edit}}. Even though you think the text is neutral, it may not be by Wikipedia's strict standards, so it'd still be better for more experienced editors to take a second look at it before it goes into the article. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 10:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass The best approach is to find the worst-offending sentences. For each one, create a new line and state: For [insert incorrect sentence here] please replace with ['insert better-worded sentence here] [add the url to a reliable source]. Then move on to the next issue and do the same. I fear you may have dumped a huge rewrite request on the talk page which I, for one, would not want to have to deal with. "Slowly slowly catchee monkey" as, I believe, they say. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Nick Moyes Thought I was making things easier for the editors! :) No harm intended. This is my thinking: Removed outdated text, updated facts and figures, and added a par on their new strategic focus. The company has undergone has lot of change since the original text was created. Have endeavoured to keep it short, sharp and factual and externally validated where I can. Still incorrect? I am no coder and find it really hard to navigate around Wikipedia. Sorry to be a bother but any help really appreciated.TracyMelass (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Verify my article and undelete it[edit]  Itswajidshaikh00 (talk) 11:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft_talk:Wajid_shaikh I see a draft whose text is "Hey team, i just created a page of living person autobiography with reliable sources and references citations kindly give me a hope to verifiy my new article". What I don't see is a biography of any kind. As for autobiographies, you're at the wrong website. -- Hoary (talk) 11:27, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have since been indefinitely blocked. You must succeed in appealing your block to have your account reinstated. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) FTR: Wikipedia:Sockpuppet investigations/Iwajidshaikh. --bonadea contributions talk 21:44, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Draft and article titles salted. Mjroots (talk) 11:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) "Can you plz help"[edit]  Priyanka9868 (talk) 11:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I HAVE TRIED SEVERAL TIME PUBLISHING CONTENT ON WIKIPEDIA BUT IT IS SHOWING PROMOTION CAN YOU PLZ HELP No need for capitals, Priyanka9868. Which article(s) or draft(s) are you asking about? -- Hoary (talk) 11:29, 22 November 2021 (UTC) This is the page Draft:Kapil Gupta — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868 (talk • contribs) 12:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Priyanka9868 Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about someone and their accomplishments. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about a person, showing how they meet the special Wikipedia definition of a notable person. Most of the sources in the draft seem to be interviews with the person, or simple biographical descriptions, not in depth, significant coverage of the person. Please see Your First Article. 331dot (talk) 12:14, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I quote the deleted draft: The company comes under IT Software ,Data Analytics , AI and IOT industries. At the very outset, OMLogic is not an marketing outsourcing company, but a strategic partner for your online marketing success. They offer a holistic “one-stop-shopping” solution for the internet marketing needs of clients. Within that, what does "strategic" add to "partner", what does "holistic" add to "one-stop-shopping", and why the "your" in "your online marketing success"? And Priyanka9868, you say that you have tried to publish this; but you have not. Or anyway "Priyanka9868" has not. Are you saying that you, Alex2321 and Sattu.pandey are all the same person? -- Hoary (talk) 12:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Also, are you related to Priyanka9868146? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) User:Alex2321 created the logo for CHES Special Risk that Priyanka9868146 used in Draft:CHES Special Risk. David notMD (talk) 15:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) No, we are not a same person. Actually he is one of my linkedin friend. I was not able to upload the logo of CHES Special Risk that why I have asked him to do so. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868146 (talk • contribs) 05:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Sandbox[edit] Hello is it possible to create an article if the first one you did has not yet been reviewed? how can I write on the sandbox if it only brings the draft I had done previously?Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Faith Buyaki, it is possible. Just create and use a new sandbox. You can do this by for example clicking on User:Faith Buyaki/sandbox 2 and using that. A different name is possible; just be sure that the name starts User:Faith Buyaki/. -- Hoary (talk) 13:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Biology[edit] Biologyassignments write briefly holozoic nutrition, parasitic nutrition, feeding mechanism in holozoic organisms. 105.112.176.163 (talk) 14:53, 22 November 2021 (UTC) We're not doing your coursework for you, and nor will the reference desks. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Holozoic nutrition exists as an under-referenced, Stub article. David notMD (talk) 15:40, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Help moving my draft[edit] Hi, I have created a draft, Draft:Angel Heredia, that I think is ready for review. Angel Heredia is already a Wikipedia page, so could someone with the needed rights move the draft to Draft:Angel Heredia (soccer) before I submit it for review? Thank you in advance! 73.162.91.15 (talk) 16:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you submit your draft for review and it is accepted, the reviewer will place it at the proper title. You may wish to leave a note on the draft talk page explaining the titling issue, though. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I went ahead and moved the draft (per Wikipedia:Naming conventions (sportspeople)#Association football (soccer)) to make it easier on the reviewer. DanCherek (talk) 16:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Paw partol[edit] Can someone help with gross of paw patrol the movie as acorrding to box office mojo it at $130M[1] 92.236.253.249 (talk) 17:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt11832046/  Courtesy link: PAW_Patrol:_The_Movie RudolfRed (talk) 18:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC)  Done by Clpo13. GoingBatty (talk) 05:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reaching a consensus[edit] Hello, after many failures, I have explained why my edits should be accepted. Please share your opinion on these pages: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock Centrereded (talk) 17:41, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Centrereded. Your edits create the impression that your goal on Wikipedia is to make Marcelo Claure and Hans Georg Näder look bad. Cullen328 (talk) 18:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded: Reaching a consensus on an article talk page is much more difficult if the text that's proposed is long and consists of many sections. It is very unlikely that you will get a consensus in favour of what essentially amounts to "please restore all my edits", especially since the text you proposed to add is not quite neutral in tone. You received some very good advice and explanations of how the process works here; please take some time to read that and start a discussion about which specific points you think should be added to the article. Well-sourced criticism of individuals and companies can certainly be included in Wikipedia articles, but it has to be added in a neutral manner, and considering what is due weight. --bonadea contributions talk 20:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I also have no interest in the topics, but did see many comments that proposed refernces were not considered Wikipedia reliable source, and a general sense of 'piling on' rather than neutral point of view and appropriate length. You have been hammering at these articles since at least July, with for example, an attack-toned draft Draft:Hans Georg Näder. Why this deep and persistent interest in a draft and an article about German and Bolivian businessmen, respectively? David notMD (talk) 21:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 19:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @ACtiling, List of people from Merseyside? It's not locked or anything, you can edit it. Only add people that has a WP-article, preferably with a reference that supports that they belong on that page, see WP:TUTORIAL on how to add references. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:13, 22 November 2021 (UTC) WP:ADVENTURE can also be useful as an intro to Wikipedia. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You are on the verge of being blocked from making any edits to List of people from Merseyside. At the Administrators' Incidents board: "This is a newish editor, who is solely focussed on making changes to one article - List of people from Merseyside. They probably mean well. However, I have never before come across an editor who is so unable to listen to advice on basic editing skills - for example, they appear to believe that it's only possible to add a name to the list while removing one at the same time. They have been repeatedly advised, and occasionally warned, by several editors on numerous occasions, and directed to places like WP:Teahouse, but appear to be completely unable to comprehend what makes an edit allowable, and seem unwilling to learn. I would far prefer that they were not blocked but rather improve their skills - but sheer inability to achieve a modicum of competence appears to be an unresolvable problem. Any advice?" At issue, SPECIFICALLY, is that you are removing existing names for no valid reason, then inserting new names, but not consistent with the alphabetical order of the list. Stop removing names. Being a person from the past is not a valid reason to remove a name. Do not remove names. Stop removing names. REALLY. Or be blocked from ever editing this article again. David notMD (talk) 21:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Why i cant see my name on wikipedia??[edit] I have acted in a Bollywood movie as an lead actress, why i cant see myself on Wikipedia’s page 43.248.70.167 (talk) 22:07, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you meet the Wikipedia definition of a notable actress, you might merit an article, but it is strongly advised that you not attempt to write one yourself, see autobiography policy. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps[edit] Arbitrary merge to another page. Argonne was one of the only 13 founding corps of Drum Corps International in 1972. An editor (with no drum corps background) arbitrarily merged this page into a defunt D & B page. Argonne should hold it's own page because of it's historical significance. Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Argonne73. Please stop edit warring: that is regarded as disruptive, and may get you blocked. We get that you believe that there should be a separate article about Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps; but several experienced editors have disagreed with you, and nobody (including you) has argued for its retention at WP:Articles for deletion/Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps. Wikipedia works by consensus: if you think a change should be made (or not be made) it is up to you to persuade other editors according to Wikipedia's policies. A core policy is notability: it is not enough for a subject to be "of historical significance" (or popular, important, famous, influential or several other characteristics which would contribute to notability out in the world): in Wikipedia we use the word in a special sense, which mostly comes down to "are there enough reliably published sources, wholly independent of the subject, and containing significant coverage of the subject, to base an article on?" Several editors have expressed their opinion that the existing article does not establish this. If you want the article retained it is up to you to persuade other editors that there are adequate sources to establish (which means, finding such sources) that it meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. --ColinFine (talk) 22:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) pokemon showdown[edit] how do i find pokemon showdown ifo here DMPenguin (talk) 00:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) DMPenguin (talk) there is one sentence about Pokémon Showdown in the "Fan community" section of the Pokémon article. If you are able to find good published references about Pokémon Showdown you can expand the article's coverage on that topic. Karenthewriter (talk) 00:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi DMPenguin! there's also a small section on rules used by smogon, the community(?) that hosts pokémon showdown over at Pokémon_competitive_play#Smogon if you want to check that or help over there. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:56, 23 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath[edit] Hi there - can someone help me with my inline citations / footnotes? I am putting up my first wiki page submission and have feedback to improve this area - but unsure what else i need to do to meet criteria. Feedback on my new page appreciated: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath Claire Leaf (talk) 03:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Three points. First, an index number ("<ref> ... </ref>") comes immediately after a comma, period, etc; not before it. Secondly, you can (and most drafts should) reuse references: ("<ref name="XYZ">full details</ref>" for the first instance, "<ref name="XYZ" />" for each subsequent instance, where "XYZ" is something distinctive). Thirdly, for any reference, you format a link something like this Author, "[https://www.example.com/blah.blahblah/blah.html Title of the web page]", Website, date. Retrieved date. -- Hoary (talk) 03:14, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Claire Leaf. Please read Referencing for beginners. There are many techniques for creating useful references. What they all have in common is that uninformative bare URLs are not displayed, but instead text based references are displayed, which include all of the relevant bibliographic details of the reference. Things like title, author, publication or publisher, date of publication, page numbers, ISBN numbers for books, and the like. Cullen328 (talk) 03:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I fixed some of the references, but in doing so, discovered that the draft as submitted is a close paraphrasing of reference #2: https://leafie.org/seizurerescuebreath/. Reword, so that the text is in your own word rather than sentences verbatim. As for the refs I did not fix, the above link shows how to convert URLs to valid refs. There remains one other problem that may b insurmountable. Wikipedia requires that for health articles, refs meet criteria described at WP:MEDRS. The refs you have do not appear to be sufficient, i.e., not review articles of multiple clinical trials. David notMD (talk) 03:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ?[edit]  Ayaelmelegy (talk) 04:06, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Ayaelmelegy, I took a quick look at the first of these. It has 13 references, but there's no indication of which of the 13 is a reference for which part of the draft. Additionally, each of the 13 is just a "bare URL". Please see the section immediately above for how to improve the references. -- Hoary (talk) 04:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Second one, drafts also URLs. David notMD (talk) 05:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) A Request to add Template to talk page[edit] As a new Wikipedia user, I always wondered how to add Template like example NoACEMM to a User talk. Moreno Ardan1 (talk) 3:18, 23 November 2021 FYI?– Removed duplicate signature As the message on your talk page suggests, you can just add {{NoACEMM}} to your own talk page. Templates usually belong to the top of talk pages. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:25, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is Imslp a good source to back up my information?[edit] Ok so I want to edit Dolores Paterno because it says there that the original lyrics were in Spanish and translated by Levi Celerio which is not true because the original sheet music from 1880 already had Tagalog lyrics and Levi Celerio added another version of lyrics.(since the original song was published before Levi was born) I don't know other sources but the sheet music in Imslp.com that explains this. Isangtaosamundo (talk) 08:28, 23 November 2021 (UTC) In your place, I'd (i) add {{Dubious|date=November 2021}} immediately after the sentence The lyrics were translated from Spanish into Tagalog by the Filipino National Artist Levi Celerio; and (ii) raise the matter on Talk:Dolores Paterno. In the latter, give your reasons for saying that it's not true. I'm unfamiliar with imslp.com; in its current state, I have to say that it looks like mere junk. Can you perhaps retrieve an earlier, reliable version from the Wayback Machine? If so, give the title and URL of the relevant page. Feel free to cite other reliable sources (books, journals) even if they haven't been reproduced on the web and aren't downloadable. -- Hoary (talk) 10:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism[edit] Hi, I wanted to know the precise difference between blatant and subtle vandalism. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:34, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! basically subtle vandalism is vandalism where there is an attempt to make it seem real or otherwise hide it from others, for example changing a date to "21 April" which may seem real until further inspection instead of something obviously fake such as "420 January" such as the case with blatant vandalism. other such cases are, from the page linked, are adding plausible misinformation to articles (such as minor alteration of facts or additions of plausible-sounding hoaxes), hiding vandalism (such as by making two bad edits and reverting only one), simultaneously using multiple accounts or IP addresses to vandalize, abuse of maintenance and deletion templates, or reverting legitimate edits with the intent of hindering the improvement of pages. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a bunch @Melecie. But still I want some help. Can you tell me what type of vandalism the two edits are in page Warfaze, which I reverted moments back. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) it may be one of those edits that fall in between, like if you understand bengali it would probably be visible that it's an attempt at vandalism, while if you don't it could be understood as an attempt to add something constructively to a page.  melecie  t - 10:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Yeah so the language matters. Any way that you @Melecie. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Archives vanished[edit] I went to my own Talk to archive discussions, only to see that my previously created archives have vanished. Any idea what happened? David notMD (talk) 11:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Nevermind. Tracked it down to a self-inflicted deletion of "Talk header"" months ago. David notMD (talk) 11:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Heading correction[edit] How do i correct a spelling on the heading? i added an unwanted letter on the heading and need to remove it . How do i do it.  11:19, 23 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by ChabbieCee (talk • contribs) ChabbieCee, you edit a regular heading (such as "Heading correction" for this thread) just as you edit other text. As for the titles of articles or other pages, you need to "move" a page to its new title. So if you realize that the name you want for Ms Nerwande is Elisabeth (with an "s"), you view the page User:ChabbieCee/Elizabeth Nerwande, click on the option to move it, specify User:ChabbieCee/Elisabeth Nerwande, give your reason for the move, and say (i) yes you want to move any talk page there may be (if there's no talk page, no matter), and (ii) yes there should be a redirect from the old name to the new one. -- Hoary (talk) 11:42, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search?[edit] I created a draft about a dance collective called FlucT Draft:FlucT. When I do a search for "fluct" on Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?search=fluct&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go&ns0=1, the draft doesn't show up. This concerns me because I fear someone else may start an article on FlucT not realizing there is already a draft. Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen To search for a draft, you must put "Draft:" in front of the draft title. Keep in mind that users are not under any obligation to first search for a draft if they want to directly create an article. I have added the submission template to your draft so you can submit it. 331dot (talk) 11:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) 331dot thanks, I probably understood that. I just wonder if it's a good policy, because some editors may not know they have to put draft: in front, miss my draft, create their own draft, then there seems to be a duplication of effort that feels needless? Greg Dahlen (talk) 13:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Greg Dahlen, and welcome to the Teahouse. You can always open a discussion on this sort of issue at the Village pump. But in my view there are good reasons for the way it is. The Wikipedia that the public sees is six million encyclopaedia articles: nothing else. That's all that is indexed by external search engines, and that's all that the Wikipedia search box gives you unless you tell it otherwise. All the rest - talk pages, drafts, user pages, projects pages, policies, essays, etc, are "under the bonnet", seen only by those who choose to look inside. --ColinFine (talk) 13:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Greg Dahlen: There is actually a clever feature which makes it unlikely anyone would accidentally start a second draft with exactly the same name as one that already exists. If you go through all the steps to begin a new article called "FlucT" by typing that in the search box, choosing the option to "Search for pages containing FlucT" and then clicking on the red link in the search output page where it says "You may create the page "FlucT", but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered." you'll find that the newly created page will have a big banner at the top saying "There is a draft for this article at Draft:FlucT." You can confirm this by clicking on the redlink I placed in this answer, which cuts out all the searching and will now go straight into draft creation mode when clicked. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:18, 24 November 2021 (UTC) how do i seen how many edits i have[edit] how do i see how many edits i have thanks DMPenguin (talk) 13:05, 23 November 2021 (UTC) By clicking this link. -- Hoary (talk) 13:23, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DMPenguin. Just in case you're wondering where the link that Hoary mentioned above can be found, just go to your user page in in the left-hand sidebar click on "User contributions" in the "Tools" section. Then, scroll all the way down to the very bottom of the page and click on "Edit count". That's where you'll find the aforementioned link. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:30, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I go to the little toolbar (Talk, Sandbox, Preferences, Beta, Watchlist, Contributions, Log out) that's to the left of my username, which is above any Wikipedia article I'm viewing when logged in. I click on Preferences and my number of edits is shown. That's what I see on an aging Mac laptop, when using Safari as a browser, but you may see something different on your computer. Karenthewriter (talk) 17:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) English[edit] What is a tea house? 41.114.234.36 (talk) 13:32, 23 November 2021 (UTC) On Wikipedia it is a friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia. Theroadislong (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Science[edit] How do you make a tealeaf 41.190.245.5 (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. This is intended to be a friendly place for getting help in using and editing Wikipedia: for general knowledge questions, the reference desk is a better place; or often, you can look at one of our six million articles, such as tea processing. --ColinFine (talk) 14:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Bold, Italics, or Quotes?[edit] I'm writing my first ever article from scratch, albeit I've written essays for practically empty existing articles many times before, so I know what I'm doing. One thing I'm never sure about however, is when to use bold, italics and "quotations." Although I know that "quotations" are used on songs. I'm at one of those situations now, while writing about some early appearances of a former footballer turned rapper. I'm mentioning and referencing a few of the Youtube channel's he appeared on, but as they don't have Wikipedia articles like SB.TV, Mixtape Madness, Link Up TV and GRM Daily do, I'm wondering whether I should put the channel names in bold, italics or "quotations"? Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Can I have an answer please? Danstarr69 (talk) 21:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Sorry you didn't get a reply until now. I guess all our volunteers were busy! We have a 'Manual of Style' which should help you (see WP:MOS), or visit WP:BOLD; WP:ITALICS and WP:QUOTATIONS for detailed guidance. Avoid using bold in articles anywhere except the first sentence to highlight the subject, and possible later on the first use of another term that is synonymous with the page title. Bold should definitely not be used to highlight YouTueb channel names or anything else. Use italics sparingly, for things like scientific names, and use quotation marks only when you actually quote something a person genuinely said (quote it verbatim), followed by a citation to prove that they said it in that exact form. Don't make quotations very large chunks of text, and don't insert song lyrics which will probably be copyright and be instantly removed. Does that answer you now? Nick Moyes (talk) 22:53, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I'm not sure. I've just had a quick look at the articles and the Style Manual seems to help a bit. However the Be Bold article you linked doesn't seem to mention anything about when to use Bold text. And the Italics and "Quotations" articles don't look much use either, especially as the "quotations" thing isn't what I was talking about. When you mention a song, you put the song title in quotation marks like this "Song". Basically what I'm saying is... Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a website/Youtube channel which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a film/TV show which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a music mixtape/EP/LP/album which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention relevant business which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention an award ceremony and its categories which don't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a person who doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Etc etc. Here's an example paragraph, with some of the things mentioned: John Smith collaborated with Jim Smith on the song "Wikipedia is Great." The music video for "Wikipedia is Great" was released on the Youtube channel Wikipedia TV. He then released his album titled Wikipedia: Greatest Hits which won a Wikipedia Award for Best Album. The Wikipedia Awards were broadcast on BBC One. Danstarr69 (talk) 23:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Very recently I learned about MOS:TITLEABSENTBOLD and would recommend not worrying too much about the infinite rules. I'll admit I don't have an ironclad rule for italics/quotations, but whatever decision you go with, consistency within the same article is key. Sometimes certain topics have their own writing guidelines/styles tied to a specific region/grammar set. Generally bold text guidelines are defined in MOS:BOLD, not to be confused with the philosophy of WP:BOLD EDITING. Someone else will help you if need be. Thank you for the question and happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Shushugah Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Text formatting#Italic type From reading the Italics bit in the above link, it basically looks like I should use Italics whenever I want to emphasise something in the middle of a sentence, unless it's a song of course, as I already know that those are highlighted with "quotation marks." Danstarr69 (talk) 00:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Indeed! A fourth scenario that wasn't mentioned. Whether a tangentially related Article exists or doesn't exist, has no impact on whether it should be boldened/italicized or quoted. You may decide depending on its usefulness make a WP:BLUELINK for existing articles, and a WP:REDLINK for non existing articles that have strong potential to become one. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 00:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Visual Editing[edit] Hi, can anybody out here tell me how I can visually edit a table, as in this page. I could figure out how I can add a new row below a specific row, but could not figure out how to change the sl. no of all the following rows, after adding a new row. I could now answer the edit request on that talk page, not only because I could not do it, but because the edit request had not provided relevant details. Anyway, can anyone please tell me the procedure of doing it. For example, consider the following. I want to add a new row after 7th row. And add new details. So what is the procedure, using visual editing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible It's a two step process, involving both Visual Editor and Source Editor. I have copied the source code from the article into my Sandbox as it's too risky playing around with tables directly - and especially as this is just a demo. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 (Note that my edit summary links to the source page where the authors are credited - do this even in your sandbox please, as we need to credit other people's work when we upload it, as it isn't really ours to claim as our own) You'll see I have added my very own, well-known and highly-popular YouTube Channel to a newly inserted row at position 8. You should do that bit most easily in Visual Editor by Selecting Row 7, clicking the Chevron button that appears on the far left of the table and selecting Insert below. Now type in all the information/data that you can, obviously numbering this as Row 8. Ignore the fact that text is not aligned, you'll fix that in the next step. Now save your edits (Publish Changes) then go back in, but via Edit Source so that you're editing the wikimarkup.Do not use VE. Find the row with the newly added data. (Tip: use Ctrl-F to search for my surname, so you're taken straight there.) Find the line containing the position number '8' that you added. It will look likethis: |8 Copy and paste the style command from an existing centred cell and paste it in so it looks like this: | style="text-align:center" |8 Preview it to check it's centred, and repeat elsewhere as necessary. For flags and so forth, find an exisiting row contining what you need and paste that in to the empty cell (also within Source Editor, not in VE) Finally, you will now have to manually edit every subsequent row so that the row number shifts up one to accommodate the newly-inserted row. (You cannot do this automatically as you might using Excel.) It should take you just a few minutes to fix this. I stopped at fixing this at row 20, which is why there are two rows numbered 20 in my demo. Again, don't use VE for this step. Please visit this Help page to appreciate what you can do in Visual Editor and all its limitations. You can't, for example, change colours with VE - you must use source editor. The 1st line of that section I linked to mentions a 'Phabricator' list of tasks to improve VE. Follow it to appreciate what can and can't yet be done. See https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T108245 Whilst you might be frustrated that you can't do everything in Visual Editor, just remember that this tool was devised to make basic editing simpler and more WYSIWYG for beginners. Experienced editors generally tend to avoid Visual Editor and prefer using Source Editor. You are now asking about very complex editing, where either only Source Editor or a combination of both editing tools will be necessary. I hope this all makes sense. Please ping me know when you've done with the stuff in my Sandbox, and I'll then delete the content from it. Nick Moyes (talk) 16:49, 23 November 2021 (UTC) PS: Another little tip for you: Enter as much data as you can in VE. If you can't add what you want, leave some placeholder text like aaaa bbbb ccccc etc in its place. This make it much, much easier to find the right cell to edit late in Source Editor/wikimarkup. Cheers, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:54, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I really don't have words to thank you man. You just helped me beyond imagination. I really did not imagine, you would use your precious time in writing so much for me. I read this page. But could not find any help. But see, you gave me the the necessary page, which has the right information. But I could not find it myself - so foolish. I just sometimes tend to wonder, how some Wikipedians, know about every help page in Wikipedia, and have explored every nook and corner of Wikipedia. They know the exact help pages, for the exact problem, and they know which help page has that needed information. For example see, the page that I was looking into, and the page that you gave me. Such a difference. I thought I might get help from the Visual Editor help page, but you gave me the actual page which has the information that I need, the Help:Table page, under the VE section. Although both the pages may seem to have the same kind of information, but it is a huge difference. And see you also left me a PS: and gave me your great tip. Yes, in that way, it is really easy to find out. Thank you again for helping me learn Wikipedia, and with all the elder Wikipedians' kind help, I am learning so fast. Thanks again. Have a nice Wikipedia career. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes But I cannot figure out one thing, while writing the name of the channel I wrote Itcouldbepossible, but wikipedia is thinking it to be a page, and in the preview section, I see that it is writing like [1], which it thinks to be a link, for further reference you can see that in your sandbox. While yours is not looking like mine. Can you figure out and tell me what is wrong with me. I am always getting confused. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:03, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible The only think "wrong with you" is your wonderful fascination in some of the minutae of Wikipedia. Nerdiness is an asset here, as is a desire to ask questions and to learn. I only hope you then put what you're learning into practice. That's why I was willing to spend time answering someone's technical questions (even though I'm no expert on tables at all - or indeed much else, if I think about it!) The best way to learn from one's errors is first to accept that one must have made a mistake, and then to keep analysing the problem until you suddenly go ahah! that's my mistake. You never forget those types of mistakes, and that's how we learn through life. Although not normally encouraged, I give you permission to go into that section of my sandbox and make an edit there to show me the problem you're encountering. I'm not 100% sure what you're seeing. My link was actually a wikilink to the Teahouse, modified to display my name. (In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity, but might not on yours. A red link is to a page that doesn't exist, whether it's an article page, a user page or something else. The link you've just pasted above was to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/En.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible If you had put it as an external link (using one square bracket), it would look like this: [2] Both would not work becaue you accidentally repeated the en.wikipedia.org elements. You actually needed https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible as an external link, though that would not be appropriate for a table. This also works: Itcouldbepossible - I forced the User: bit to not display by putting a vertical pipe character at the end. Now I think you asked somewhere else about how we learn all this stuff. Watching, reading, doing and making mistakes. It's taken me 10 years of editing to pick up the stuff I'm now happy to share with you, but I was quite able to do most of the basic editing (apart from tables - they're really scary!) after quite a short time. I worry a bit that you're wanting to "run before you can walk", but I hope I've now managed to answer all your various questions. Good luck! Nick Moyes (talk) 11:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes, you are answering all my questions to my content. And you were saying about putting into use what I am learning. Yes, I am doing that. For example when I copied the table from your sandbox to my new tables sandbox, I wrote from whom I have copied the table. What I am wanting to say is that for example I want a wiki link to my talk page, which would show up like "Itcouldbepossible", using the vertical pipe (|) character. Then why cannot I do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very simple. [[User talk:Itcouldbepossible|Itcouldbepossible]] renders as Itcouldbepossible. For help on wikilinks, see Help:Wikilinks. --David Biddulph (talk) 12:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks, that was what I was wanting to do from the beginning. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible If you edit the source to this thread and look at my reply above, you should see exactly how I did it. The alternative is still to use the vertical pipe after your username, but to add different text (either your own name without the User: bit) or as I did when linking you to Albert Einstein! You'll work it out. Nick Moyes (talk) 12:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thank you, I wanted to tell you this from the very beginning. But you could not understand it, anyway, thank you for all the other help that you provided. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Also I want to know how I can turn by wiki redirects to green as you said here - In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:26, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Is it possible to mask external links to read the way I want. I mean Wiki links can be renamed as the editor wishes, is there any way in which external links can be masked, or is it at all possible? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating a page ethically[edit] Creating a page for my boss My boss is adamant that she wants a Wikipedia account (she's a prominent science communication researcher). I think she probably deserves one, but I'm also deeply aware that I'm biased as a prospective page author. Does anyone have any advice for me? I want to make my boss happy, but not by violating Wikipedia guidelines. Lorikie (talk) 14:26, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: You'll need to read and abide by Wikipedia:Conflict of interest. DuncanHill (talk) 14:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lorikie, and welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for being up-front about your situation. Unfortunately, there are some formidable obstacles in the way of you being able to satisfy your boss. As Duncan says, you need to read up about conflict of interest, and further, you need to make the formal declarations that you are a paid editor (it doesn't matter if you are specifically paid to do this, from what you say it is part of your job). Next, you need to drop the idea of "deserving a page", because that assumes that a Wikipedia article is in any way for the benefit of its subject. Of course many people (and other entities) do get some benefit frrom there being a Wikipedia article about them, but that is incidental: Wikipedia has no such purpose, and indeed is indifferent as to whether the subject wants an article about them or does not want an article about them. An article about your boss will not belong to her, will not be under her control, will not necessarily say what she wants it to say, and should be based almost entirely on what people wholly unconnected with her have chosen to publish about her (good or bad!) and not on what she or her associates say or want to say. You might like to show her an article about yourself isn't necessarily a good thing. The counterpart of "deserve" that Wikipedia actually uses is, "does the subject meet Wikipedia's criteria for notability? This is not directly related to prominence, importance, influence, popularity, or any of the other things that you might normally connect with "notability": in essence it is a question of whether there are enough reliably published sources, wholly unconnected with the subject to base an article on. If you and she decide that you still want there to be an article, there are more hurdles. Creating a new article is much more difficult than it looks - I liken it to building a house as your first building project, or playing a public recital after your first violin lesson, and always advise new editors to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" and how Wikipedia works. Editors who do not heed this advice often have a frustrating time as they put in a lot of work and don't understand why their house keeps falling down. Having a conflict of interest you will likely find it even harder, as you will need to basically forget everything you know about your boss, and summarise only what those independent commentators have published. If you decide to go ahead, you need to read your first article, and then use the articles for creation process to create a draft. --ColinFine (talk) 14:57, 23 November 2021 (UTC) If pressed to proceed by your boss, see if there are three or more published articles about her - content at length, not just a name-mention - and then use guidance at Help:Referencing for beginners to create references in proper ref format in your Sandbox. If you cannot find publications about her, then the effort is futile. David notMD (talk) 15:52, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: Is your boss by any chance Laura Lindenfield? If so, I think that you will have a very difficult time finding the sources you'll need for a draft article on a living person in which each and every statement has to have a reliable reference. When I Google her name, I get a number of sources but they are virtually all based on interviews (or are on websites clearly linked to her), so are not WP:INDEPENDENT. The nearest I can find that might be OK is this one at science.org which probably reaches the WP:SIGCOV for notability (specifically in her case WP:NACADEMIC) but still seems, by using language like "She is passionate about...", to take a tone that Wikipedia would not use (see WP:NPOV). Your best bet, I think, is to draft a very short article using such independent sources and then not be too disappointed if the Draft is declined: that will at least prove you have tried! Make sure you start by complying with the mandatory disclosures described at WP:PAID. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Text Allignment[edit] Any idea on text alignment in table. I want to center align some text in tables, using visual editor. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:44, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible I think you'd probably need to use wikisource code for that, using the "text-align:center; parameter. PS: I've tweaked the demo warning you placed on your sandbox page as you'd left the nowiki commands in which stop it from working. So the warning now looks like it's come from me, but obviously isn't a real vandalism warning. The best way to leave warnings is to enable WP:TWINKLE in your Preferences. Then it does it automatically for you via menu options, plus a whole lot more. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thanks for the edit. I know it is not a real vandalism warning. It is just my sandbox. If I had done something wrong, then you would have told me in the talk page. But anyway to get to the point, I have already TWINKLE enabled. I used it to start delete discussions, and got myself blocked for being thought to be a sockpuppet, since that page was created by another sock, and the sock with whom the checkusers thought me to be linked had edit warred with the previous sock. Anyway thats not the point. What you are saying is that it will give me warnings. Can you specify what warning, or what type of warnings??? Also it would be really kind of you, if you could tell me in a more precise way of how to use wikisource code, suddenly while I am writing in normal language. For example I am using "text-align:center" here, but nothing is happening. Please tell me the way, to center text in a table while using visual or source editor. Thanks for the answer, and regards. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible As I replied to you on my sandbox, it's important that you are editing tables and complex entries in WP:Source Editor not Visual Editor. Did you follow my instructions on how to switch between them, and did it work? You will get nowhere with anything other than the simplest of tables if you stick to VE. The parameter I mentioned above is wiki markup - as written with Source Editor. So, go to the table I put in my sandbox for you at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 Click 'Edit Source' next to the heading to open the section in Source Editor. (Tell me if that function is not showing, as it means you've not forced it to display via your personal Preferences setting. My default is for it to offer me both editing tools all the time - it should be yours, too, especially if you're working on tables.) Search for the word 'center' and you'll see 101 examples - one controlling each cell of data. Regarding WP:TWINKLE: Go to your own userpage. Use the drop down menu box marked 'TW' to access the Twinkle menu. The first sub-item is WARN. This opens a menu box for you to explore the various options. Try leaving yourself a first level warning against vandalism, then a second, and then a third. I can't explain all the options here for you - we expect editors to very carefully' learn for themselves how to use these powerful tools (which can easily upset other users). So read the TWINKLE page and the accompanying Documentation to understand what it can do. But it covers most of the common issues of edit waring, content removal, addition of uncited content, harassment, conflict of interest, spamming, plus single issue notices like encouragement to use edit summaries, biting newcomers, etc etc. There is a complete list of warning templates (here). Nick Moyes (talk) 10:33, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes the edit source function is showing. Also I thought that you were telling me of editing error warnings, so I asked what type of warnings. I had pasted that warning in my sandbox just to see how it looks. I knew how to use twinkle. For the table related thing, I want to know where should I place "text-align:center; parameter? I have made my edit on your sandbox. You can see that, and tell me if it is right or wrong. You will see that the table I created, it has some errors. For the channel name column I thought of adding my talk page and then renaming the wiki link as "Itcouldbepossible". But it showed up like this: ([3]) - why??? While your wiki link it redirects it to the teahouse it shows Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel? How come??? Why cannot I edit my wiki link to show my username, while on clicking it redirects to my talk page. For example yours show Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel and it redirects to WP:TH Why is mine not like that?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 11:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Tables[edit] Today I was editing random articles, when I came across Nach Baliye. I was reading the article, trying to find for any errors, when I came across this table [4]. I just sort of went mad seeing this table. Just a well formatted and advanced table, with all the color schemes, and just nice cell merging. Can anyone, for heaven's sake tell me how that table was created with all those attractive features. I don't really think that the Wiki markup was typed out. There must be some modern graphical interface, for doing such a tedious thing. I want to know how that table was created. I would really be glad, if I get the answer from someone who is an expert in this matter, and has been editing Wikipedia for a couple of years, because, I want the exact and precise method of creating such a table. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:58, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I've been editing for over 10 years and wouldn't dare to create such a thing. I have, however, created very long data tables by starting in Excel, getting all the sorting, the text and the wikilinks and in the right places before exporting it with a tool to Wikimarkup. But I'm not aware of a tool to make tables look pretty like that - so I shall await for answers from other users more experienced in such things, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: It takes work, often over time with improvements by different editors, often starting with copying the format from another page. The first similar table in the article was added by an IP here with edit summary "added table like other shows Jhalak". That may refer to Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart or an earlier season. It could maybe be tracked further back but I haven't tried. Help:Table has general help but it's complicated. Much of it is the same or similar as HTML tables which some editors already know. PrimeHunter (talk) 16:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @PrimeHunter Yes, but how did that specific table appear in Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart. How was it created??? And also I wanted to know one thing, how on Earth did you find that specific page history, when the table was added?? I have seen many people doing so. Is their anyway of finding out when a specific edit was first made, and the what edits followed?? I really don't think that you flicked through the page history. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible There are various ways to find when an edit was first made. The slow way is to look at 500 edits in View History at a time. Let's assume that covers the entire history (if not, just increase the number to 5000 in the url bar), then you can find a rough midway point, click (and note down) the date you clicked. Is the edit showing there? IF yes, go down and divide the lower half of edits into half again, and select another date to click. Is the edit there? If 'No', then it will have been made between those two date points. Divide the edits roughly in half again and then again until you find the first one where that edit was made. Doing this in conjunction with looking at View History (green numbers are positive count of bytes added/red are negative overall additions) makes this just a few minutes work. It took me just a few moments to do that for Nach Baliye, speeded up by using Ctrl-F to search for 'Scoring Chart', of which there were 823 mentions in the edit summaries. I went to the lowest one, then scrolled down a dozen or so edits further and found a massive addition by an IP on 9 March 2019 with a very helpful edit summary. Job done. Of course, that's the slow way. For simplest way to find when a short text string was first added to an article is to copy it, then go to the View History tab. Just above all the row entries, click Find addition/removal to use the 'WikiBlame' tool. Be aware that by default it only searches 500 of the latest edits before the date selected. So it will miss the first addition of text if it's a very heavily edited page as this one is unless you spend time to understand how to take advantage of the tool's searching features. I wouldn't use it to search for a chart being added, but I might focus on just one unique element or keyword in that chart. Hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks, I learnt a new thing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 10:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the answer. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Prime Healthcare[edit] My interest in CAlifornia health systems drew me to Prime Healthcare, where I was struck by the difference in how Wiki editors handle the material. Whereas large systems such as Sutter and Kaiser are given the opportunity to list history, background, hospital names, etc, Prime's editing history is aggressive and heavy handed. The result is a page listing controversy and nothing else. Prime owns 45 hospitals nationwide, employs 50000 people, but you wouldn't know it by Wiki. BTW I am in no way affiliated or compensated by Prime; my research is for a graduate program. I'm just amazed at the discrepancy and poor treatment. I haven't researched it enough to determine whether sources should be improved on deleted materials, but that is different than what edit history shows. Any attempts to improve the page are immediately deleted wholesale, in apparent violation of Wiki editing rules. (I attempted to undo some edits myself) Can anyone explain this? Prime owner Prem Reddy has made a number of enemies with his handling of labor, etc. Is that at play here? Archie515 (talk) 16:46, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Prime Healthcare Services Karenthewriter (talk) 17:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Archie515. Welcome to the Teahouse! You can discuss the issue about the content of the article on the article's talk page. The concerned editors might engage in the conversation and help you in finding a possible solution. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 17:24, 23 November 2021 (UTC) thanks but page monitors refuse to allow access and have not responded to talk page requests in the past. Now locked out from making any changes to sources. Page is an embarrassment to all Wiki contributors. Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC)Archie515Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The Controversy section is well supported by reliable published sources. It's Prime Healthcare that should be embarrassed. Maproom (talk) 23:04, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Archie515: I see you posted twice at Talk:Prime Healthcare Services. The last piece of advice you were given there was to make a specific request. I suggest you think about the worst problem with the article, and then post a specific detailed suggestion on the talk page, such as: Please change the current article text "_____________" to "_____________" based on the independent reliable source found at ___________________. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Disambiguation-links tag on redirects[edit] In this edit I intentionally changed a redirect from targeting an article to targeting a disambiguation page. To my surprise, the "adding disambiguation links" tag was added. In a way, it makes sense (I added a link to a disambiguation page), but on the other hand, the tag is probably meant for when someone adds a link in an article without knowing it's a disambiguation page, like if I added a link to Georgia or Mercury in an article. Can something be changed so that this tagging isn't activated when the end result of the edit is a redirect? I reported this at WP:EF/FP but was sent here for a reason I don't understand: the responding editor said both that the tag isn't activated and that it's working properly. 72.77.45.188 (talk) 17:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The edit filter (which interdicts edits) is separate from the tagging system (which describes what an edit is). —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 17:38, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Do anyone think like that?[edit] Are there people actually thinking that this page represents a universal and unbiased point of view? Owerthise (talk) 18:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I think like that. It doesn't seem biased to me. What direction do you think it's biased in? Maproom (talk) 18:43, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think there is such a thing as an universal point of view, certainly not about a topic connected to religion. It looks neutral to me; it may not be perfect (no article is) but there are no obvious problems. --bonadea contributions talk 19:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Owerthise: Welcome to the Teahouse! If you have a specific suggestion to improve the article, please post it on Talk:Muhammad with a reliable source and the {{edit extended-protected}} template, and another editor will review your request. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Help with revision[edit] Hello! I'm trying to revise the first two paragraphs of the Cultural context section of Cueva de las Manos and I need help with it. I've already put in a copy edit request for the whole page with the Guild of Copyeditors, but I was wondering if there was a group/person willing to help with this particular section in the meantime. I'm trying to revise the section in accordance with the following advice of FunkMonk in the talk page: There is some repetition in how you describe the paintings were returned to and were influential for the people throughout many thousands of years, perhaps check if someone of it can be consolidated or made less similar. If anyone would be willing to lend a hand in this respect it would be much appreciated. If there is a better place to ask for such help, I would be grateful if someone could point me there. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Best, Tyrone Madera (talk) 18:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) This might be better for the Talk Page, but one possible way to consolidate this might be to write this instead, which combines two separate statements: However, that so many people contributed to the artwork for thousands of years suggests the cave held great significance for the artists, with earlier groups influencing later ones through a continuous narrative, playing out over millennia. But that's just one possibility. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 18:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing this Ayaelmelegy (talk) 22:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Ayaelmelegy, and welcome to the Teahouse. I'm afraid there is quite a lot you need to do before that draft is publishable. The things that caught my attention are: Remove all the links to interviews. There are restrictions on the use of External links in articles, and in any case Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. Format all the references so that a reviewer can readily evaluate which of them are likely to be most reliable and independent. See REFB, and WP:NONENG. With you anonymous URLs it is hard to see whether your draft establishes that she meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. Remove all the evaluative language. No article should ever describe anything in Wikipedia's voice as "one of the most important" or "much needed". I get that you strongly approve of Hamdy's work, but none of that must come out in the article: it must be a neutral summary of what the independent sources say about her - and if there is criticism, then you should probably summarise that too. (You can quote a source that described something as "important" or "much needed" but you need to make sure that it is a source which is wholly unconnected with the subject). Please also see WP:NOTSOAPBOX. --ColinFine (talk) 23:12, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I did some edits would you please check them? Thank you — Preceding unsigned comment added by Ayaelmelegy (talk • contribs) 00:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) new wikipedia page[edit]  2600:1700:9C80:62E0:89ED:2A1E:FE48:ACD3 (talk) 22:08, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome. If you want to create a new article(not a page), that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content. If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Unregistered users(as well as new accounts) cannot directly create new articles. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) What do you do on this page[edit]  Jenay Ava (talk) 22:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Jenay Ava Welcome to the Teahouse. What we do is welcome new users and assist them with any problems they may encounter whilst editing Wikipedia. We recognise that it can be a steep learning curve to begin with, so we try to make that journey a little smoother for you in the hope that you will stick around and become one of our many regular contributors. Unfortunately, looking at your very first few contributions, I fear you think Wikipedia talk pages might be like a chat forum. They are not, and all we do here is help build the worlds greatest online encyclopaedia, and use the talk pages to assist us in that task. You'd be most welcome to help with this undertaking (6.2 million+ article in English so far), but this place is not a social media chat site. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:40, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Help writing a page[edit] I have the page written and now need to post to wikipedia, I have akk the references. Please help, FletcherEmma (talk) 23:37, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @FletcherEmma welcome to Tea House!. If you want to create a new article, that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content.If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. I have been editing the errors on Draft:Gehad Hamdy for while. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing? Thank you. Ayaelmelegy (talk) 00:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, some things need to be improved: (1) the article must have a lead portion (the introduction should not have a heading), (2) there should not be no links or Arabic letters in section headings, (3) there is too much text in the infobox, and Arabic text isn't needed there. There are other things, but you can start with this. Regards. — Alalch Emis (talk) 00:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) STATUS: Draft nominated for Speedy deletion and creating editor blocked as suspected sock (denies). David notMD (talk) 01:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have overhauled (Major Cleanup) the article (This specifically). Jairus is doing... ?? 02:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ayaelmelegy: Draft:Gehad Hamdy has no references in the "Biography" and "Speak Up" sections. Please add more independent reliable sources to your draft before submitting for AfC. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 06:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) GoingBatty, "Ayaelmelegy" got an indefinite block six hours before your last (and of course well-intentioned) message. -- Hoary (talk) 12:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Ongoing Events Section[edit] What happened with the ongoing events section on both the desktop website and the mobile website? It used to be a nicely categorized, bulleted set of news. But not it's just hyperlinks to specific wikipedia pages. I would use the previous style daily, it was a wonderful source for news. I wonder if there is a good reason for removing it, or if it was potentially even an oversight. Regardless I loved that feature and don't want to lose it :( 47.229.202.202 (talk) 01:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Are you confusing Portal:Current events/Sidebar and Portal:Current events? Both are linked from "In the news" on Main Page, on "Ongoing" and "Other recent events". PrimeHunter (talk) 02:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Rv tags[edit] Hello. Is it possible to remove tags? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Possibly - which tags were you considering removing, and why? GoingBatty (talk) 06:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty, no, I've no reason, I've seen some users who edit without any tags. So I asked. Can the tags be removed without any reason? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: When tags are removed from an article, it's assumed that the problems they highlight have been resolved. If an editor feels that a tag was removed prematurely, they'll add it back at their own discretion. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Tenryuu, I didn't tell about the tags of article. I told about editing tags such as "2017 wikitext editor". Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 07:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: There is a difference between Wikipedia:Tags and Wikipedia:Templates I see you removed the {{under construction}} template from the Carlos Moguel Jr. article in this edit, but you cannot remove the tag "2017 wikitext editor" from the edit. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 07:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Those are not removable. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reftoolbar[edit] How to change the date format for Reftoolbar? from Dmy to mdy. Thanks. —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Welcome to the Teahouse! It appears that there is a discussion about this at Wikipedia talk:RefToolbar#Date formats. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) User level[edit] Hi, I wanted to know how I can add a user level. I mean there will be a bar on my user page, and it will fill up as I edit articles. And beside it would be written, my next user level. Any idea on how to do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Here's a workaround, Itcouldbepossible. Just edit articles, constructively. Soon you will be "extended confirmed". Most people are, and few people will be surprised or much interested to know that you are. There are some other very minor superpowers that you can acquire; but again, few people will be interested. Some superpowers are a bit out of the ordinary, and you might want to advertise one or other of these; on the other hand, advertising them may seem somewhat vulgar. Best is to aim to be an article-improving Clark Kent. -- Hoary (talk) 11:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible Welcome to Tea House! As @Itcouldbepossible stated, it's rarely of interest to anyone else. This essay on WP:HATCOLLECTING could be useful on the mostly harms/some benefits of gamifying your user page with statistics. I do indulge myself with Wikipedia:Service awards as a way of marking specific tiers of editing. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 12:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Dead Links[edit] I see that many pages have something called 'dead links'. What are these so called 'dead links', and how can I make them alive again?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) For information about dead links, read WP:Dead links. --David Biddulph (talk) 09:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks again for the answer Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Add (journalist) to title[edit] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anshuman_Tiwari Can you write this in brackets as journalist because it is journalist? You can write Journalist in back of their name in brackets. Coolblack4 (talk) 10:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Coolblack4, and welcome to the Teahouse. We use a term in parenthesis like that in an article title only when it is necessary to distinguish between different people (or other subjects) with the same name. See WP:Disambiguation. --ColinFine (talk) 11:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Something drastic certainly should be done to this article. Sample: In digital journalism, he has created and successfully established an innovative and exclusive multilingual digital first content vertical moneybhaskar.com for Danik Bhaskar Group, DB Corp. It is the largest Hindi business portal and offers guidance, utility and wisdom based jargon free economic-business and investment content to aspiring readers in Hindi. (For one thing, I wonder what is being excluded.) -- Hoary (talk) 12:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Distracting AFC submission templates[edit] Does anyone know how to collapse or get the "this topic is not notable" AFC submission templates out of the way? I'm trying to work on a draft article, and they're distracting and take up about half of the page. wizzito | say hello! 12:43, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Those templates were put there for the benefit of reviewers, and of anyone who might want to work on improving the draft. You should not remove or collapse them. That's why they all say "Do not remove this line!" Maproom (talk) 13:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thing is, they are INCREDIBLY distracting to look at, I at least want to move them to the bottom at the page if I can't collapse or make them invisible. I just can't have them taking up 90% of the page from the top, it bothers me a lot and prevents me from working. wizzito | say hello! 13:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Reality shifting has been Declined three times and Rejected twice. I have restored the Declined and Rejection and Comments to the top of the article, where those belong. David notMD (talk) 14:23, 24 November 2021 (UTC) If you believe you can rescue this with better references, do so, but be aware that Rejected drafts are likely to be deleted and 'salted.' Make sure you have an off-Wikipedia copy. And understand that 'salted' means that an Administrator's approval would be needed to try again to create a draft on this topic. David notMD (talk) 14:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there seriously no way to get these to the bottom of the page (where they are still visible) or make them look less distracting? Your comments aren't helping me, sorry. Also, I am still working on the article; I had to rewrite it from scratch because the original user who created the draft made it look very bad and had bad formatting and grammar. (Also, they kept resubmitting it multiple times despite not addressing the concerns, I haven't submitted it yet.) It isn't anything speedy deletable (see Wikipedia:Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity), there's a Washington Post report and a scholarly article on the subject, but probably just needs to be worked on and more RS might need to be made before it gets published. wizzito | say hello! 14:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Declines and Rejections are considered a required part of draft history, so that the next reviewer can check if the weaknesses identified by previous reviewers have been addressed. Given that you have taken over a draft created and edited by other editors, you can leave a Comment to that effect with the other Comments. David notMD (talk) 14:39, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there no way to at least move it to a part of the page where it's visible by people contributing and reviewers, but not as distracting as a glob that takes up the first part of the page? If not, I may just have to move it to my userspace and work on it from there. wizzito | say hello! 14:42, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David notMD noting for the record I have reverted you; @Wizzito offers up a convincing reason why they moved them down, because it was distracting for them, and as long as they move them back up before resubmitting I see no issue with that move. That is ignoring the question whether or not these templates are relevant at all considering the rewrite currently ongoing, although it appears that at least some of the original text still exists. -- Asartea Talk | Contribs 15:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have added a Comment that you are in the process of completely revising the draft. Do as much as you can before submitting. I know nothing about the topic, but will mention that as it stand now, the lead is over-referenced. Pick at most three refs to support the Lead. Those refs and the others may be used in the body of the article, as more detail on history, reception, criticism, etc. is added. David notMD (talk) 14:47, 24 November 2021 (UTC) That's because I was working on it, putting the references in so I can use them later, and then delete the ref in the lead when I've finished reviewing the source and using it to source statements. You act like a draft should have the same standards as mainspace, and besides, I moved it to userspace anyways so I can work on it. wizzito | say hello! 14:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You didn't move it, you copied & pasted the content, so please read about copying within Wikipedia. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I want to pitch in from an outside editor. 5 declined templates, 2 separate comments, and 1 draft template? I know if I was unaware of all Wikipedia policies, this would feel very WP:BITEy to me. Is there not a better solution, in the form of an {{articlehistory}} style template? I understand why the need for all the notices (for future reviewers to know at a glance), but there can be so many better ways to do this now. --JackFromWisconsin (talk | contribs) 14:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I feel like a lot of people in this thread are being BITEy too... wizzito | say hello! 15:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My intention was to proffer advice on how to create a draft that is more likely to be accepted. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I understand, but I feel as if my questions weren't answered and were just met with a "don't do this" or "don't do that" and reverts. wizzito | say hello! 15:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Tendentious editing[edit] This is not marked as an essay. This is also not marked with the green symbol for policy, guidelines pages. So, how important are these types of guideline pages? Knight Skywalker (talk) 12:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very important. It's a supplementary explantion to the guideline WP:DE, and carries the same status. Mjroots (talk) 13:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Mjroots: If this is very important, then why Wikipedia is not including the green symbol in the box? --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I didn't use the bold format, but still the above lines are showing as in bold to me. --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You used the bold format by putting a semi-colon before the colon at the start of the line. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I've fixed the bold. Mjroots (talk) 16:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) This page is not one of Wikipedia's policies or guidelines, as it has not been thoroughly vetted by the community. Also it has category. Wikipedia essays (?) (±) Knight Skywalker (talk) 17:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Markup[edit] Is there any introduction page, or help page, or user guide page for Wikipedia Markup. If there is then please provide me. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Itcouldbepossible, you may be looking for Help:Wikitext. DanCherek (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks for the Wiki Help page, I am surely going to read it. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Page[edit] As you see now, my talk page has become a little clumsy. What is the way to make it clean? Should I archive them or is there any other option? Seeking for options. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: While you're allowed to delete conversations from your own talk page, archiving is recommended because it makes it more convenient for you and other editors to find those old conversations in the future. There are a few different ways to archive a talk page – you can do it manually or have a bot help you – and there is more information about each of those at Help:Archiving a talk page. DanCherek (talk) 14:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek I have archived the archival messages left by a bot on my talk page and have shifted them here. But I cannot move the three notification to three different headings, it is coming under a single heading. Please can you help me in that respect. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The first section starts with {| so you need to end it with |}. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Newcomers[edit] How, can I find all newcomers on Wikipedia??? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:08, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: You can find them at Special:Log/newusers but for what purpose ? 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA (talk) 15:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) IP blocking for 31 hours[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… I hope you don’t mind me asking this question: When administrators impose a block on IP addresses for the first time, the length of the block is usually 31 hours (1 day, 7 hours). Do you have any idea why administrators chose this value? Thanks. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 15:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC). It's so that they don't just wait 24 and return to the same things. 31h is also a standard length in the blocking dropdown menu and has been since before I was an admin. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Imagine a kid messing around in study hall, causing a school's IP to be blocked. A 24-hour block would allow him or her to come back the next day during the same period to cause more trouble. Deor (talk) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Amkgp is Sock editing[edit] Hi, first I was blocked on the ground of thinking to be a sockpuppet, and the sockpuppet investigation was raised by an ipv6 ip 2402:3A80:6E1:9A2E:A110:65A0:5AD7:4F15. The sock investigation page is here. In the Clerk, CheckUser, and/or patrolling admin comments section Blablubbs commented and said The filer is obviously Amkgp loutsocking. I blocked them for a bit. Then after the block expired then again another comment was added by ipv6 user 2402:3A80:1A4E:9197:C5B8:CED1:C0FD:9A1D, and then blablubbs blocked the ipv6 again. When it was proved that I am not a sockpuppet, this ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:A17E:9C61:AA1F:59E2:32A2 came and added welcomed me. Till date, I could not understand anything, why an ipv6 was coming an leaving me messages on my talk page. Today again an ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA came and gave me a vandalism warning on an edit that I made two articles namely, Piet van der Sluijs and Dré Saris, where I had only added a more reference needted tag using twinkle. It was my mistake or not is a far matter, but then he leaves me another link to learn wikipedia in under an hour link. He also answers one of my questions in the teahouse. The thing is all these ipv6 start with 2402:3A80, and blablubbs has stated previously that it is block evasion of sock amkgp. Now what is to be done? Should I raise a sockpuppet investigation request?? Would it be possible to block just huge range ipv6s? Please give me suggestion in this matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 16:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Also in there sockpuppet investigation page [[5]] we can see that the suspected sock puppets ipv6 also starts with 2402:3A80. We can also see that he got blocked because he used to edit logged out for a couple of time, and he was blocked for that reason. And also in a further section we see that he also used or uses 2409:4061::/36 this ipv6 range. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Itcouldbepossible (talk • contribs) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Article Not Published - not adequate sources[edit] Hi, I am trying to publish an article about a triceratops skull nicknamed 'Dragon King' which was sold last year which is the biggest skull ever found, but the article was rejected due to a lack of sources. The sale was private so there wasn't a lot of press generated, but what there was is referenced. The skull is definitely the biggest in the world. How would I go about validating that? Would an image of the skull with dimensions count? What could I use to validate it. Any suggestions would be very welcome. I should make clear that I have no financial stake in this at all, it is simply a fact that the skull is the biggest found and I think should be public information. Maudjohnson90 (talk) 16:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Maudjohnson90 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Wikipedia articles summarize what publicly available independent reliable sources say about a topic. If a topic is not sufficiently covered in such sources, it cannot be on Wikipedia. Documents in private hands or otherwise not available to the public cannot be used as sources here. Did no sources cover this sale, or its discovery? If some did, but not enough for a standalone article, there may be an existing article this could be mentioned in. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Shouldn't you first put any reliable information at Triceratops#Size, Maudjohnson90? That's a pretty well-watched article and if you think that particular skull needs another full article, you could discuss that on the Talk Page at Talk:Triceratops Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:59, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks Mike Turnbull! I have added information under Triceratops#Skull and that has remained since I added it. I'll discuss on the Talk Page as suggested. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Maudjohnson90 (talk • contribs) 17:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Final Publish[edit] Hello Sir, how much time does it take for the draft to get finally published ? Thank you. Johnalphanso (talk) 17:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You have not created nor submitted a draft to Articles for Creation. Is there a particular draft you are interested in? — Preceding unsigned comment added by David notMD (talk • contribs) 18:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Johnalphanso, and welcome to the Teahouse. There is no simple answer to your quewstion: a draft takes as long to be published as it takes. There is no queue, no schedule, no deadline: all editors are volunteers, and work on what they choose when they choose. If you're talking about Draft:Sanskar Desai, that will not get reviewed until it is submitted for review (add {{subst:AFC/draft}} to the top). But it will not get accepted until somebody follows Theroadislong's advice in the comment and removes all the unreliable sources from the list. It will likely not get accepted until somebody reformats the references from a useless list of URLs to a meaningful set of citations - see CITE. There are probably other things that need improving too: in particular, the question of whether it has been worked on by a paid editor. --ColinFine (talk) 18:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How do I contribute images?[edit]  Bettertoseeit (talk) 19:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Bettertoseeit Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please review WP:UPIMAGE carefully. It's not as easy to do as it may appear. You must be autoconfirmed(account is four days old with 10 edits or more) to upload images yourself, but you can visit Files for upload to get assistance with doing so if not autoconfirmed. 331dot (talk) 19:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating Book Pages[edit] Hello. One of the reasons I became an editor was an interest in filling some of the gaps in bibliographies I am familiar with. What I'm unsure about is if an author has a large bibliography with Wiki articles already created for most of their books (for example; Stephen Baxter bibliography), am I safe in assuming I can create pages for those novels which do not have an article, or might the lack of an article be for a reason? Thanks in advance. John Bullock (talk) 20:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Such novels still have to be independently notable. Ruslik_Zero 20:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Jbullock83 Welcome to Tea House! In general, a notable author does not mean their books are automatically notable and vice versa, see WP:NOTINHERIT, however in the book specific Wikipedia:Notability (books) guidelines, it does mention certain famous authors' books are likely to be automatically notable. Anything by Jane G. Austin for example, but another editor may disagree. Looking at specific notability criteria for the books themselves would be the most forward process. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 20:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the info/reply! Ruslik, Shushugah. John Bullock (talk) 21:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) ASIAN MONTH[edit] i would like to ask if my translated ( not fully complete article counts for the ediathon asian month in order to get a postcard Georgekagian (talk) 21:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian Welcome to Tea House! Your question is better asked on Wikipedia talk:Wikipedia Asian Month/2021 but if you add {{WAM talk 2021}} to the talk page of said article, a WikiProject judge will determine its eligibility for you. I doubt a full translation is needed, since each article can be independently edited anyways. It needs to comply with English Wikipedia WP:5 Principles whereas it may differ in other languages. Thank you for the question and happy editing! Good luck with the edit-a-thon! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 21:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian, looking at here, it looks like it counts unless it was a pure machine translation (e.g. Google Translate) that you didn't copy edit to correct any errors. {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 21:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) What did I do wrong?[edit] I'm the guy who created the article for Legends of the Multiverse: Draft:Legends of the Multiverse, just wondering why you rejected it? LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. The reason for the decline(not rejection) was left by the reviewer at the top of the draft. Do you have specific questions about it? 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) In short, your draft seems to have no sources. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The fan film does not have any progress on the production yet, why do you expect it to be full of sources? Sources will only be added during production. (also i'm new here on wikipedia so i don't know what exactly are sources) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Please review what a reliable source is. If no independent reliable sources have written about your film, showing how it meets the special Wikipedia definition of a notable film, it cannot be written about on Wikipedia. Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about something. If you have further comment, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. Please also review conflict of interest. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) "Legends of the Multiverse is widely regarded as among one of the greatest film series ever made", but "Production will begin in 5 December 2021." I see why this draft has been described as a blatant hoax. Maproom (talk) 22:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Calculating and "fixing" Hubble's Constant using light speed (C) and Pi only.[edit] Is it possible to to use the following equation as a Hubble Constant value for reference purposes only on the Hubble Chart page? It is unique in the fact no measuring processes are involved, so accuracy of Hubble's Constant is as good as the inputted speed of light :-  2 X a Megaparsec X C, divided by Pi to the power of 21 =  71 Kilometres / Second / Megaparsec
 For this equation, a Parsec is the standard 3.26 light years. C is light speed in Kilometres / Second, and Pi is 3.142....... This equation "fixes" Hubble's Constant directly and precisely to light speed (C) and Pi. As this equation is original, there are no references, but it has been tested, and has successfully withstood many challenges since 2008. I am quite happy if it were used anonymously, due to the fact there are no references. The lack of external references was (rightly) the reason it was rejected as a stand alone article / submission. No copyrights are involved, as it is purely lifted from my work (Astrogeometry), and is not the work of anyone else I feel its anonymous inclusion on the Hubble Chart page would stimulate new interest in what has now become a "Hubble Constant stalemate". Sincerely, ClownBojo ClownBojo (talk) 22:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Interesting. The same theory was advanced several years ago here on Wikipedia by a user named David Michael Hine. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 22:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Please read no original research, ClownBojo. Unless several independent people have written about the equation in reliable sources, it does not belong in Wikipedia. Period. --ColinFine (talk) 23:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong?[edit] But the movie is overall just an idea from my mind, I'm actually making this movie with my two best friends. So technically, I wouldn't call it a "hoax" since it's actually coming to YouTube. Did you even read the entire article? If you don't want an article related to my fan film in this site, where else do I put it? (p.s. irrelevant question: do you like the idea of my fan film trilogy?) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) "where else do I put it?" Facebook, maybe. Maproom (talk) 22:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Yes, Wikpedia is not for people to tell the world about what they do. When the New York Times or CNN or BBC write about your film, then someone independent of you will write an article about it. Until then, you will need to use social media. 331dot (talk) 22:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Re: Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong?[edit] I don't use Facebook and which specific social media do I share the movie's existence? LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 23:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI anywhere else but here. Please stop creating a new section for each question. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Make a YouTube video telling the world that you are making a film. 331dot (talk) 23:12, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Basically I think you may benefit from reading WP:NOT & internalizing what it says about what Wikipedia is not, you may find it imperative. Celestina007 (talk) 23:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You can also have a look at WP:OUT, LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI. --ColinFine (talk) 23:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Fair use[edit] Why are fair use resolutions lowered? It doesn’t make sense that Wikipedia lowers resolution on fair use images. Other wikis don’t do this. Alex Mitchell of The Goodies (talk) 23:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1057020756" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 23:25 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH GoingBatty, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 Autoconfirmed user 2 Template:Uw-create-kept 3 Audio sample 4 How to create Article page for Musical Artist 5 section formatting 6 Citing Manga 7 Problem with visual editor 8 How can I remove a website from spam or black list? 9 Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page 10 Verify my article and undelete it 11 "Can you plz help" 12 Sandbox 13 Biology 14 Help moving my draft 15 Paw partol 16 Reaching a consensus 17 I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page 18 Why i cant see my name on wikipedia?? 19 Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps 20 pokemon showdown 21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath 22 I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ? 23 A Request to add Template to talk page 24 Is Imslp a good source to back up my information? 25 Vandalism 26 My Talk Archives vanished 27 Heading correction 28 Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search? 29 how do i seen how many edits i have 30 English 31 Science 32 Bold, Italics, or Quotes? 33 Visual Editing 34 Creating a page ethically 35 Text Allignment 36 Wiki Tables 37 Prime Healthcare 38 Disambiguation-links tag on redirects 39 Do anyone think like that? 40 Help with revision 41 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 42 new wikipedia page 43 What do you do on this page 44 Help writing a page 45 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 46 Ongoing Events Section 47 Rv tags 48 Reftoolbar 49 User level 50 Dead Links 51 Add (journalist) to title 52 Distracting AFC submission templates 53 Wikipedia:Tendentious editing 54 Wikipedia Markup 55 My Talk Page 56 Newcomers 57 IP blocking for 31 hours 58 Amkgp is Sock editing 59 Article Not Published - not adequate sources 60 Final Publish 61 How do I contribute images? 62 Creating Book Pages 63 ASIAN MONTH 64 What did I do wrong? 65 Calculating and "fixing" Hubble's Constant using light speed (C) and Pi only. 66 Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong? 67 Re: Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong? 68 Fair use 69 Asian month Most recent archives 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131, 1132 Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yep, @Patrick Vedel you should just close that and/or any other notes you might have and proceed to edit said article. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The sentences 2 - 5 are there in case they don't know about them. Faster than Thunder (talk) 06:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: & @Nick Moyes: thank you for guidance. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 07:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) How to create Article page for Musical Artist[edit]  Jasonseah69 (talk) 23:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69 Welcome to the Teahouse, and thank you for asking. Creating a Wikipedia article from scratch is the hardest task for anyone to achieve here - especially for a newcomer. Trying to write one about yourself is fraught with problems and issues, and will be seen as WP:PROMOTION. See our Conflict of Interest and AUTOBIOGRAPHY advice, too. But most of all, see WP:NMUSIC - this is a shortcut link to our essential Notability criteria for musicians. If you cannot find multiple, independent, in-depth sources that have written about you in detail (ignore your own PR output), and you don't meet any of the music notability criteria, then I'm afraid there's no chance. But if you feel you do meet those criteria, it's still best to leave it to someone who wants to write about you - not try to do it yourself. That person should then gain experience in editing here for some time, and then read This Guide on creating an article and submitting it for review through our Articles for Creation process, before it goes through our final 'New Page Review' process and is allowed to remain in the encyclopaedia. That's a brief outline of the process. Please do not attempt to use your Wikipedia WP:USERPAGE to write about yourself, or it will be deleted. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Good advice above. NB take "someone who wants to write about you" to mean "someone who, unprompted, wants to write about you". Not somebody asked (let alone paid) to do so. -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69: Welcome to the teahouse. You can create an article, or just submit using a draft for the Articles for Creation. However, if there aren't any sources, if may be deleted, so take your own risks for creating an article, or for less risks, create a draft. To create one, go to Wikipedia:Draft. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Severestorm28, please be aware that Jasonseah69 has only made three edits, is not autoconfirmed, and therefore cannot create an article directly. Also, their user page has been deleted as G11 - unambiguous advertising or promotion. Cullen328 (talk) 01:26, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cullen328: Next time-if someone is not autoconfirmed, and advertising, I'm giving them a warning. Thanks for the reminder. Severestorm28 (talk) 14:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) section formatting[edit] I had a draft reviewed and the reviewer suggested I use "==Section Formatting==". I cannot find any information on ==Section Formatting== on any of the help pages. Can someone send me a link which explains what ==Section Formatting== is and how to implement it? I appreciate the review and suggestions. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Looking at your draft, it's divided into headings using bold text titles, which isn't how articles are typically ordered here. If you replace the bold formatting on your section titles with two equals signs on either side, it'll create a more traditional section header for each title, which also then forces the page to create a table of contents and allows easier navigation. ??????? ? 00:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Thank You. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:47, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage COURTESY: Draft:Peebles Homestead You fixed that, but there are other problems. Several descriptive paragraphs have no references. Much of the content about his military service is general history, i.e., not about him (nor is it about the house). Hence, not relevant. David notMD (talk) 02:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) your draft has great promise. The section on the homestead today used one reference source three times, so I reformatted the citations so that the references are combined. You did a good job of finding references, can any of your sources be used for paragraphs that have no references? If not, where did you find the data about the house dimensions and construction details? If it was from a published source (such as a history book or local newspaper article) those can be used as a reference. Unfortunately, if it was from an unpublished source (such as handwritten notes found at a historical society) that would be considered original research and can't be used as a reference. You'll need to do some more work on your draft, but I'm sure it can be improved enough to be accepted. Keep up the good work. Karenthewriter (talk) 09:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Ownership gap between 1838 and 1994. David notMD (talk) 10:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Karenthewriter, Thanks for combining my multiple citations; I couldn't figure that out! The dimensions for the house (and other observations) came from me. I measured the house to see if the dimensions matched the 1798 Tax records, but I'm sure I can find them in other sources, especially the State Museum Survey. Also, I think the few sentences about Peebles' military record are relevant, because his military service adds credibility to the comment that the property could be eligible for the National Register. Without a notable person, places like Monticello and Montpelier would just be old brick houses. I could insert his military service elsewhere. Thoughts? Granted, Peebles service and the Cumberland County Militia could be separate articles which I can't do right now. I will clean up my citations. SharedHeritage (talk) 01:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @SharedHeritage: To answer your original question, see MOS:SECTIONS. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 05:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) I'm glad I could help with your multiple citations. I've been an editor since 2007 and I just recently mastered that skill. There's a lot to learn. As David notMD stated the information about Peebles military service isn't about the homestead you're writing about, so a reviewer might feel its unnecessary. (I'm not a reviewer, so I am no expert on that subject.) You mention Peebles received two different land grants. Did he receive any of his land due to his military service? If so you could state that, which would tie in the homestead with him being in the military. I live in northwest Pennsylvania, and some of the area's earliest settlers apparently received land because of their Revolutionary War service, so that's why I asked about the land grants. One thing you need to be aware of is that Wikipedia does not want any original research, or writers speculating on what happened. (To quote Sergeant Friday from the old TV show Dragnet – "Just the facts, ma'am.") So I'm a bit concerned about such phrases as "it is reasonable to believe that the windows are original..." and "The two front doors were likely replaced at this time," for that reads as though you are guessing or giving an opinion. You can quote someone and say that researcher Joe Smart-Guy believes the windows are original, and give a reference citation, but don't make it sound as though it's your conclusion. Remember that you're writing an encyclopedia article for the general reading public, and not trying to convince a historical commission to add the house to the National Register. I hope I'm not overwhelming your with details, but I'm aware that writing for Wikipedia means following Wikipedia rules. Best wishes on your research and writing project. Karenthewriter (talk) 05:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Manga[edit] Hi, I'm new to Wikipedia. I am currently trying to figure out how to add a small detail to a page about Kennedy Space Center in Pop Culture. I'm wondering how I should cite the manga volumes of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure for the details I need. Should I use a pre-existing source on Wikipedia to the volumes that links to the publisher's website, or should i use the ISBN and author info as my citation? Cheese420 (talk) 04:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Author, book title, place, publisher, year, ISBN, and page number, Cheese420. And perhaps additional info besides, such as details of the original publication. -- Hoary (talk) 05:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cheese420 I'm going to disagree with @Hoary here. For a WP-pop cult section, you don't cite the manga, you cite a WP:RS that noticed that the manga had the KSC in it and bothered to write something about it, like at least some of the films are mentioned at [1]. Anything in that section without a decent secondary source should be removed. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) That would be better, yes. (But I'd rather got the impression that that was a lost cause.) If a secondary source comments on the pop culture item and one can cite the former, wouldn't the listing be more informative if publication details of the pop culture item itself were supplied as well? -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I will not object to adding primary source as well, but personally I wouldn't bother. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Compare, for example, Death Note at Donald Trump in popular culture. Warning, the DT article has some scary stuff. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Shocking stuff indeed, Gråbergs Gråa Sång. Not least the revelation that "Trump has an article on the online encyclopedia Wikipedia." (Well I never!) -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I may have to disagree here too, that does seem the least shocking item to me ;-) Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Problem with visual editor[edit] When I edit wikitables using Visual Editor, the tools doesn't work, I'm trying to edit a text within the table but whenever I tap the wikitable, it goes lock. Can anyone help me? Anyone? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 05:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Could you tell us which table in which article you're trying to edit? The most common cause that I can think of is that the table's cells are created with templates instead of the usual table syntax, but I have to see the table itself to know. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:46, 22 November 2021 (UTC) In filmography table. After seeing this problem, I've tried to edit in other device, but still not working. Maybe only mobile user can experience this problem. The Visual editor was okay before, it works well, but it is not working now. It's not a template, it's wikitable, could you please help me, I can't edit using visual editor—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 12:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) The question you were asked was "which table in which article"? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Blp articles, or almost all articles that has wikitable. I'm using VE until now because of referencing. But using VE to edit wikitables, doesn't work when using a mobile. The VE is working properly before—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 13:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Please provide the specific name of one article where you are having this issue. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 05:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty: Try to look my sandbox, there is a draft article with a table there. I can't link specific article, because I'm having this problem in all articles that has a table, my example is my sandbox—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: I had no problem editing the wikitable on user:Ctrlwiki/sandbox with VisualEditor with my Windows 10 PC and Google Chrome. What hardware/software are you using? Are you using the Wikipedia app? Or are you using browser on your phone (in mobile view or desktop view)? What do you mean "it goes lock"? Could you please provide a screenshot of that situation? GoingBatty (talk) 15:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How can I remove a website from spam or black list?[edit] Hello I created a page in the sandbox and requested it to be reviewed. For this post, I used various sources, including a site, which I later found out it was blocked. Is it possible for me to request and remove the site from spam or blacklist? How? Also, is there a way to edit my written draft? AlexJan24 (talk) 06:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) hi AlexJan24! your draft is located at Draft:Bitumen penetration testing, feel free to input that in the search bar (including the Draft: prefix) to get to your draft. as for the blacklisted site, what source are you trying to use? theremay be a reason over at WP:RSP as to why it's blacklisted. if you want to add a whitelist for a page in there, you can hop over to MediaWiki talk:Spam-whitelist and request there to whitelist it for your article (but don't forget to read WP:Reliable sources first!). happy editing!  melecie  t - 06:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) thank you @Melecie! :) I want to use this URL: {infinitygalaxy.org/bitumen-penetration-test/} I am pretty sure that it has a good and reliable information. AlexJan24 (talk) 08:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @AlexJan24 This is a commercial website, and content like that is often placed on them to help promote their business and public perception. Can you not find something more academic and less dependent of one particular company? How about https://www.academia.edu/37842763/Penetration_Test_on_Bituminous_Materials ? Nick Moyes (talk) 10:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Nick Moyes, thank you for your suggestion! :) actually, the page you mentioned is good, but does not have the content I want. Moreover it is paid content not free. I am a petrochemical engineer. In fact, I have decided to write about such tests, which are very important and useful in the industry. As compared to other sites, I find this one to have more complete content. AlexJan24 (talk) 13:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page[edit] Hi guys I'm still feeling a bit lost. I have some factually updated text I would like to add to the BDR Thermea page. I have made my identity and intentions clear and being open, honest and upfront. There is no marketing-speak in the text. Please advise how I can place this new text. TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass: As said before, you should file an edit request on the talk page at Talk:BDR Thermea by following the instructions listed at {{Request edit}}. Even though you think the text is neutral, it may not be by Wikipedia's strict standards, so it'd still be better for more experienced editors to take a second look at it before it goes into the article. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 10:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass The best approach is to find the worst-offending sentences. For each one, create a new line and state: For [insert incorrect sentence here] please replace with ['insert better-worded sentence here] [add the url to a reliable source]. Then move on to the next issue and do the same. I fear you may have dumped a huge rewrite request on the talk page which I, for one, would not want to have to deal with. "Slowly slowly catchee monkey" as, I believe, they say. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Nick Moyes Thought I was making things easier for the editors! :) No harm intended. This is my thinking: Removed outdated text, updated facts and figures, and added a par on their new strategic focus. The company has undergone has lot of change since the original text was created. Have endeavoured to keep it short, sharp and factual and externally validated where I can. Still incorrect? I am no coder and find it really hard to navigate around Wikipedia. Sorry to be a bother but any help really appreciated.TracyMelass (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Verify my article and undelete it[edit]  Itswajidshaikh00 (talk) 11:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft_talk:Wajid_shaikh I see a draft whose text is "Hey team, i just created a page of living person autobiography with reliable sources and references citations kindly give me a hope to verifiy my new article". What I don't see is a biography of any kind. As for autobiographies, you're at the wrong website. -- Hoary (talk) 11:27, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have since been indefinitely blocked. You must succeed in appealing your block to have your account reinstated. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) FTR: Wikipedia:Sockpuppet investigations/Iwajidshaikh. --bonadea contributions talk 21:44, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Draft and article titles salted. Mjroots (talk) 11:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) "Can you plz help"[edit]  Priyanka9868 (talk) 11:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I HAVE TRIED SEVERAL TIME PUBLISHING CONTENT ON WIKIPEDIA BUT IT IS SHOWING PROMOTION CAN YOU PLZ HELP No need for capitals, Priyanka9868. Which article(s) or draft(s) are you asking about? -- Hoary (talk) 11:29, 22 November 2021 (UTC) This is the page Draft:Kapil Gupta — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868 (talk • contribs) 12:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Priyanka9868 Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about someone and their accomplishments. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about a person, showing how they meet the special Wikipedia definition of a notable person. Most of the sources in the draft seem to be interviews with the person, or simple biographical descriptions, not in depth, significant coverage of the person. Please see Your First Article. 331dot (talk) 12:14, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I quote the deleted draft: The company comes under IT Software ,Data Analytics , AI and IOT industries. At the very outset, OMLogic is not an marketing outsourcing company, but a strategic partner for your online marketing success. They offer a holistic “one-stop-shopping” solution for the internet marketing needs of clients. Within that, what does "strategic" add to "partner", what does "holistic" add to "one-stop-shopping", and why the "your" in "your online marketing success"? And Priyanka9868, you say that you have tried to publish this; but you have not. Or anyway "Priyanka9868" has not. Are you saying that you, Alex2321 and Sattu.pandey are all the same person? -- Hoary (talk) 12:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Also, are you related to Priyanka9868146? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) User:Alex2321 created the logo for CHES Special Risk that Priyanka9868146 used in Draft:CHES Special Risk. David notMD (talk) 15:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) No, we are not a same person. Actually he is one of my linkedin friend. I was not able to upload the logo of CHES Special Risk that why I have asked him to do so. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868146 (talk • contribs) 05:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Sandbox[edit] Hello is it possible to create an article if the first one you did has not yet been reviewed? how can I write on the sandbox if it only brings the draft I had done previously?Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Faith Buyaki, it is possible. Just create and use a new sandbox. You can do this by for example clicking on User:Faith Buyaki/sandbox 2 and using that. A different name is possible; just be sure that the name starts User:Faith Buyaki/. -- Hoary (talk) 13:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Biology[edit] Biologyassignments write briefly holozoic nutrition, parasitic nutrition, feeding mechanism in holozoic organisms. 105.112.176.163 (talk) 14:53, 22 November 2021 (UTC) We're not doing your coursework for you, and nor will the reference desks. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Holozoic nutrition exists as an under-referenced, Stub article. David notMD (talk) 15:40, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Help moving my draft[edit] Hi, I have created a draft, Draft:Angel Heredia, that I think is ready for review. Angel Heredia is already a Wikipedia page, so could someone with the needed rights move the draft to Draft:Angel Heredia (soccer) before I submit it for review? Thank you in advance! 73.162.91.15 (talk) 16:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you submit your draft for review and it is accepted, the reviewer will place it at the proper title. You may wish to leave a note on the draft talk page explaining the titling issue, though. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I went ahead and moved the draft (per Wikipedia:Naming conventions (sportspeople)#Association football (soccer)) to make it easier on the reviewer. DanCherek (talk) 16:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Paw partol[edit] Can someone help with gross of paw patrol the movie as acorrding to box office mojo it at $130M[1] 92.236.253.249 (talk) 17:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt11832046/  Courtesy link: PAW_Patrol:_The_Movie RudolfRed (talk) 18:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC)  Done by Clpo13. GoingBatty (talk) 05:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reaching a consensus[edit] Hello, after many failures, I have explained why my edits should be accepted. Please share your opinion on these pages: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock Centrereded (talk) 17:41, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Centrereded. Your edits create the impression that your goal on Wikipedia is to make Marcelo Claure and Hans Georg Näder look bad. Cullen328 (talk) 18:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded: Reaching a consensus on an article talk page is much more difficult if the text that's proposed is long and consists of many sections. It is very unlikely that you will get a consensus in favour of what essentially amounts to "please restore all my edits", especially since the text you proposed to add is not quite neutral in tone. You received some very good advice and explanations of how the process works here; please take some time to read that and start a discussion about which specific points you think should be added to the article. Well-sourced criticism of individuals and companies can certainly be included in Wikipedia articles, but it has to be added in a neutral manner, and considering what is due weight. --bonadea contributions talk 20:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I also have no interest in the topics, but did see many comments that proposed refernces were not considered Wikipedia reliable source, and a general sense of 'piling on' rather than neutral point of view and appropriate length. You have been hammering at these articles since at least July, with for example, an attack-toned draft Draft:Hans Georg Näder. Why this deep and persistent interest in a draft and an article about German and Bolivian businessmen, respectively? David notMD (talk) 21:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 19:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @ACtiling, List of people from Merseyside? It's not locked or anything, you can edit it. Only add people that has a WP-article, preferably with a reference that supports that they belong on that page, see WP:TUTORIAL on how to add references. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:13, 22 November 2021 (UTC) WP:ADVENTURE can also be useful as an intro to Wikipedia. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You are on the verge of being blocked from making any edits to List of people from Merseyside. At the Administrators' Incidents board: "This is a newish editor, who is solely focussed on making changes to one article - List of people from Merseyside. They probably mean well. However, I have never before come across an editor who is so unable to listen to advice on basic editing skills - for example, they appear to believe that it's only possible to add a name to the list while removing one at the same time. They have been repeatedly advised, and occasionally warned, by several editors on numerous occasions, and directed to places like WP:Teahouse, but appear to be completely unable to comprehend what makes an edit allowable, and seem unwilling to learn. I would far prefer that they were not blocked but rather improve their skills - but sheer inability to achieve a modicum of competence appears to be an unresolvable problem. Any advice?" At issue, SPECIFICALLY, is that you are removing existing names for no valid reason, then inserting new names, but not consistent with the alphabetical order of the list. Stop removing names. Being a person from the past is not a valid reason to remove a name. Do not remove names. Stop removing names. REALLY. Or be blocked from ever editing this article again. David notMD (talk) 21:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Why i cant see my name on wikipedia??[edit] I have acted in a Bollywood movie as an lead actress, why i cant see myself on Wikipedia’s page 43.248.70.167 (talk) 22:07, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you meet the Wikipedia definition of a notable actress, you might merit an article, but it is strongly advised that you not attempt to write one yourself, see autobiography policy. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps[edit] Arbitrary merge to another page. Argonne was one of the only 13 founding corps of Drum Corps International in 1972. An editor (with no drum corps background) arbitrarily merged this page into a defunt D & B page. Argonne should hold it's own page because of it's historical significance. Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Argonne73. Please stop edit warring: that is regarded as disruptive, and may get you blocked. We get that you believe that there should be a separate article about Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps; but several experienced editors have disagreed with you, and nobody (including you) has argued for its retention at WP:Articles for deletion/Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps. Wikipedia works by consensus: if you think a change should be made (or not be made) it is up to you to persuade other editors according to Wikipedia's policies. A core policy is notability: it is not enough for a subject to be "of historical significance" (or popular, important, famous, influential or several other characteristics which would contribute to notability out in the world): in Wikipedia we use the word in a special sense, which mostly comes down to "are there enough reliably published sources, wholly independent of the subject, and containing significant coverage of the subject, to base an article on?" Several editors have expressed their opinion that the existing article does not establish this. If you want the article retained it is up to you to persuade other editors that there are adequate sources to establish (which means, finding such sources) that it meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. --ColinFine (talk) 22:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) pokemon showdown[edit] how do i find pokemon showdown ifo here DMPenguin (talk) 00:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) DMPenguin (talk) there is one sentence about Pokémon Showdown in the "Fan community" section of the Pokémon article. If you are able to find good published references about Pokémon Showdown you can expand the article's coverage on that topic. Karenthewriter (talk) 00:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi DMPenguin! there's also a small section on rules used by smogon, the community(?) that hosts pokémon showdown over at Pokémon_competitive_play#Smogon if you want to check that or help over there. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:56, 23 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath[edit] Hi there - can someone help me with my inline citations / footnotes? I am putting up my first wiki page submission and have feedback to improve this area - but unsure what else i need to do to meet criteria. Feedback on my new page appreciated: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath Claire Leaf (talk) 03:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Three points. First, an index number ("<ref> ... </ref>") comes immediately after a comma, period, etc; not before it. Secondly, you can (and most drafts should) reuse references: ("<ref name="XYZ">full details</ref>" for the first instance, "<ref name="XYZ" />" for each subsequent instance, where "XYZ" is something distinctive). Thirdly, for any reference, you format a link something like this Author, "[https://www.example.com/blah.blahblah/blah.html Title of the web page]", Website, date. Retrieved date. -- Hoary (talk) 03:14, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Claire Leaf. Please read Referencing for beginners. There are many techniques for creating useful references. What they all have in common is that uninformative bare URLs are not displayed, but instead text based references are displayed, which include all of the relevant bibliographic details of the reference. Things like title, author, publication or publisher, date of publication, page numbers, ISBN numbers for books, and the like. Cullen328 (talk) 03:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I fixed some of the references, but in doing so, discovered that the draft as submitted is a close paraphrasing of reference #2: https://leafie.org/seizurerescuebreath/. Reword, so that the text is in your own word rather than sentences verbatim. As for the refs I did not fix, the above link shows how to convert URLs to valid refs. There remains one other problem that may b insurmountable. Wikipedia requires that for health articles, refs meet criteria described at WP:MEDRS. The refs you have do not appear to be sufficient, i.e., not review articles of multiple clinical trials. David notMD (talk) 03:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ?[edit]  Ayaelmelegy (talk) 04:06, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Ayaelmelegy, I took a quick look at the first of these. It has 13 references, but there's no indication of which of the 13 is a reference for which part of the draft. Additionally, each of the 13 is just a "bare URL". Please see the section immediately above for how to improve the references. -- Hoary (talk) 04:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Second one, drafts also URLs. David notMD (talk) 05:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) A Request to add Template to talk page[edit] As a new Wikipedia user, I always wondered how to add Template like example NoACEMM to a User talk. Moreno Ardan1 (talk) 3:18, 23 November 2021 FYI?– Removed duplicate signature As the message on your talk page suggests, you can just add {{NoACEMM}} to your own talk page. Templates usually belong to the top of talk pages. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:25, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is Imslp a good source to back up my information?[edit] Ok so I want to edit Dolores Paterno because it says there that the original lyrics were in Spanish and translated by Levi Celerio which is not true because the original sheet music from 1880 already had Tagalog lyrics and Levi Celerio added another version of lyrics.(since the original song was published before Levi was born) I don't know other sources but the sheet music in Imslp.com that explains this. Isangtaosamundo (talk) 08:28, 23 November 2021 (UTC) In your place, I'd (i) add {{Dubious|date=November 2021}} immediately after the sentence The lyrics were translated from Spanish into Tagalog by the Filipino National Artist Levi Celerio; and (ii) raise the matter on Talk:Dolores Paterno. In the latter, give your reasons for saying that it's not true. I'm unfamiliar with imslp.com; in its current state, I have to say that it looks like mere junk. Can you perhaps retrieve an earlier, reliable version from the Wayback Machine? If so, give the title and URL of the relevant page. Feel free to cite other reliable sources (books, journals) even if they haven't been reproduced on the web and aren't downloadable. -- Hoary (talk) 10:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism[edit] Hi, I wanted to know the precise difference between blatant and subtle vandalism. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:34, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! basically subtle vandalism is vandalism where there is an attempt to make it seem real or otherwise hide it from others, for example changing a date to "21 April" which may seem real until further inspection instead of something obviously fake such as "420 January" such as the case with blatant vandalism. other such cases are, from the page linked, are adding plausible misinformation to articles (such as minor alteration of facts or additions of plausible-sounding hoaxes), hiding vandalism (such as by making two bad edits and reverting only one), simultaneously using multiple accounts or IP addresses to vandalize, abuse of maintenance and deletion templates, or reverting legitimate edits with the intent of hindering the improvement of pages. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a bunch @Melecie. But still I want some help. Can you tell me what type of vandalism the two edits are in page Warfaze, which I reverted moments back. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) it may be one of those edits that fall in between, like if you understand bengali it would probably be visible that it's an attempt at vandalism, while if you don't it could be understood as an attempt to add something constructively to a page.  melecie  t - 10:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Yeah so the language matters. Any way that you @Melecie. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Archives vanished[edit] I went to my own Talk to archive discussions, only to see that my previously created archives have vanished. Any idea what happened? David notMD (talk) 11:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Nevermind. Tracked it down to a self-inflicted deletion of "Talk header"" months ago. David notMD (talk) 11:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Heading correction[edit] How do i correct a spelling on the heading? i added an unwanted letter on the heading and need to remove it . How do i do it.  11:19, 23 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by ChabbieCee (talk • contribs) ChabbieCee, you edit a regular heading (such as "Heading correction" for this thread) just as you edit other text. As for the titles of articles or other pages, you need to "move" a page to its new title. So if you realize that the name you want for Ms Nerwande is Elisabeth (with an "s"), you view the page User:ChabbieCee/Elizabeth Nerwande, click on the option to move it, specify User:ChabbieCee/Elisabeth Nerwande, give your reason for the move, and say (i) yes you want to move any talk page there may be (if there's no talk page, no matter), and (ii) yes there should be a redirect from the old name to the new one. -- Hoary (talk) 11:42, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search?[edit] I created a draft about a dance collective called FlucT Draft:FlucT. When I do a search for "fluct" on Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?search=fluct&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go&ns0=1, the draft doesn't show up. This concerns me because I fear someone else may start an article on FlucT not realizing there is already a draft. Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen To search for a draft, you must put "Draft:" in front of the draft title. Keep in mind that users are not under any obligation to first search for a draft if they want to directly create an article. I have added the submission template to your draft so you can submit it. 331dot (talk) 11:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) 331dot thanks, I probably understood that. I just wonder if it's a good policy, because some editors may not know they have to put draft: in front, miss my draft, create their own draft, then there seems to be a duplication of effort that feels needless? Greg Dahlen (talk) 13:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Greg Dahlen, and welcome to the Teahouse. You can always open a discussion on this sort of issue at the Village pump. But in my view there are good reasons for the way it is. The Wikipedia that the public sees is six million encyclopaedia articles: nothing else. That's all that is indexed by external search engines, and that's all that the Wikipedia search box gives you unless you tell it otherwise. All the rest - talk pages, drafts, user pages, projects pages, policies, essays, etc, are "under the bonnet", seen only by those who choose to look inside. --ColinFine (talk) 13:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Greg Dahlen: There is actually a clever feature which makes it unlikely anyone would accidentally start a second draft with exactly the same name as one that already exists. If you go through all the steps to begin a new article called "FlucT" by typing that in the search box, choosing the option to "Search for pages containing FlucT" and then clicking on the red link in the search output page where it says "You may create the page "FlucT", but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered." you'll find that the newly created page will have a big banner at the top saying "There is a draft for this article at Draft:FlucT." You can confirm this by clicking on the redlink I placed in this answer, which cuts out all the searching and will now go straight into draft creation mode when clicked. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:18, 24 November 2021 (UTC) how do i seen how many edits i have[edit] how do i see how many edits i have thanks DMPenguin (talk) 13:05, 23 November 2021 (UTC) By clicking this link. -- Hoary (talk) 13:23, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DMPenguin. Just in case you're wondering where the link that Hoary mentioned above can be found, just go to your user page in in the left-hand sidebar click on "User contributions" in the "Tools" section. Then, scroll all the way down to the very bottom of the page and click on "Edit count". That's where you'll find the aforementioned link. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:30, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I go to the little toolbar (Talk, Sandbox, Preferences, Beta, Watchlist, Contributions, Log out) that's to the left of my username, which is above any Wikipedia article I'm viewing when logged in. I click on Preferences and my number of edits is shown. That's what I see on an aging Mac laptop, when using Safari as a browser, but you may see something different on your computer. Karenthewriter (talk) 17:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) English[edit] What is a tea house? 41.114.234.36 (talk) 13:32, 23 November 2021 (UTC) On Wikipedia it is a friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia. Theroadislong (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Science[edit] How do you make a tealeaf 41.190.245.5 (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. This is intended to be a friendly place for getting help in using and editing Wikipedia: for general knowledge questions, the reference desk is a better place; or often, you can look at one of our six million articles, such as tea processing. --ColinFine (talk) 14:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Bold, Italics, or Quotes?[edit] I'm writing my first ever article from scratch, albeit I've written essays for practically empty existing articles many times before, so I know what I'm doing. One thing I'm never sure about however, is when to use bold, italics and "quotations." Although I know that "quotations" are used on songs. I'm at one of those situations now, while writing about some early appearances of a former footballer turned rapper. I'm mentioning and referencing a few of the Youtube channel's he appeared on, but as they don't have Wikipedia articles like SB.TV, Mixtape Madness, Link Up TV and GRM Daily do, I'm wondering whether I should put the channel names in bold, italics or "quotations"? Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Can I have an answer please? Danstarr69 (talk) 21:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Sorry you didn't get a reply until now. I guess all our volunteers were busy! We have a 'Manual of Style' which should help you (see WP:MOS), or visit WP:BOLD; WP:ITALICS and WP:QUOTATIONS for detailed guidance. Avoid using bold in articles anywhere except the first sentence to highlight the subject, and possible later on the first use of another term that is synonymous with the page title. Bold should definitely not be used to highlight YouTueb channel names or anything else. Use italics sparingly, for things like scientific names, and use quotation marks only when you actually quote something a person genuinely said (quote it verbatim), followed by a citation to prove that they said it in that exact form. Don't make quotations very large chunks of text, and don't insert song lyrics which will probably be copyright and be instantly removed. Does that answer you now? Nick Moyes (talk) 22:53, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I'm not sure. I've just had a quick look at the articles and the Style Manual seems to help a bit. However the Be Bold article you linked doesn't seem to mention anything about when to use Bold text. And the Italics and "Quotations" articles don't look much use either, especially as the "quotations" thing isn't what I was talking about. When you mention a song, you put the song title in quotation marks like this "Song". Basically what I'm saying is... Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a website/Youtube channel which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a film/TV show which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a music mixtape/EP/LP/album which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention relevant business which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention an award ceremony and its categories which don't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a person who doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Etc etc. Here's an example paragraph, with some of the things mentioned: John Smith collaborated with Jim Smith on the song "Wikipedia is Great." The music video for "Wikipedia is Great" was released on the Youtube channel Wikipedia TV. He then released his album titled Wikipedia: Greatest Hits which won a Wikipedia Award for Best Album. The Wikipedia Awards were broadcast on BBC One. Danstarr69 (talk) 23:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Very recently I learned about MOS:TITLEABSENTBOLD and would recommend not worrying too much about the infinite rules. I'll admit I don't have an ironclad rule for italics/quotations, but whatever decision you go with, consistency within the same article is key. Sometimes certain topics have their own writing guidelines/styles tied to a specific region/grammar set. Generally bold text guidelines are defined in MOS:BOLD, not to be confused with the philosophy of WP:BOLD EDITING. Someone else will help you if need be. Thank you for the question and happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Shushugah Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Text formatting#Italic type From reading the Italics bit in the above link, it basically looks like I should use Italics whenever I want to emphasise something in the middle of a sentence, unless it's a song of course, as I already know that those are highlighted with "quotation marks." Danstarr69 (talk) 00:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Indeed! A fourth scenario that wasn't mentioned. Whether a tangentially related Article exists or doesn't exist, has no impact on whether it should be boldened/italicized or quoted. You may decide depending on its usefulness make a WP:BLUELINK for existing articles, and a WP:REDLINK for non existing articles that have strong potential to become one. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 00:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Visual Editing[edit] Hi, can anybody out here tell me how I can visually edit a table, as in this page. I could figure out how I can add a new row below a specific row, but could not figure out how to change the sl. no of all the following rows, after adding a new row. I could now answer the edit request on that talk page, not only because I could not do it, but because the edit request had not provided relevant details. Anyway, can anyone please tell me the procedure of doing it. For example, consider the following. I want to add a new row after 7th row. And add new details. So what is the procedure, using visual editing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible It's a two step process, involving both Visual Editor and Source Editor. I have copied the source code from the article into my Sandbox as it's too risky playing around with tables directly - and especially as this is just a demo. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 (Note that my edit summary links to the source page where the authors are credited - do this even in your sandbox please, as we need to credit other people's work when we upload it, as it isn't really ours to claim as our own) You'll see I have added my very own, well-known and highly-popular YouTube Channel to a newly inserted row at position 8. You should do that bit most easily in Visual Editor by Selecting Row 7, clicking the Chevron button that appears on the far left of the table and selecting Insert below. Now type in all the information/data that you can, obviously numbering this as Row 8. Ignore the fact that text is not aligned, you'll fix that in the next step. Now save your edits (Publish Changes) then go back in, but via Edit Source so that you're editing the wikimarkup.Do not use VE. Find the row with the newly added data. (Tip: use Ctrl-F to search for my surname, so you're taken straight there.) Find the line containing the position number '8' that you added. It will look likethis: |8 Copy and paste the style command from an existing centred cell and paste it in so it looks like this: | style="text-align:center" |8 Preview it to check it's centred, and repeat elsewhere as necessary. For flags and so forth, find an exisiting row contining what you need and paste that in to the empty cell (also within Source Editor, not in VE) Finally, you will now have to manually edit every subsequent row so that the row number shifts up one to accommodate the newly-inserted row. (You cannot do this automatically as you might using Excel.) It should take you just a few minutes to fix this. I stopped at fixing this at row 20, which is why there are two rows numbered 20 in my demo. Again, don't use VE for this step. Please visit this Help page to appreciate what you can do in Visual Editor and all its limitations. You can't, for example, change colours with VE - you must use source editor. The 1st line of that section I linked to mentions a 'Phabricator' list of tasks to improve VE. Follow it to appreciate what can and can't yet be done. See https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T108245 Whilst you might be frustrated that you can't do everything in Visual Editor, just remember that this tool was devised to make basic editing simpler and more WYSIWYG for beginners. Experienced editors generally tend to avoid Visual Editor and prefer using Source Editor. You are now asking about very complex editing, where either only Source Editor or a combination of both editing tools will be necessary. I hope this all makes sense. Please ping me know when you've done with the stuff in my Sandbox, and I'll then delete the content from it. Nick Moyes (talk) 16:49, 23 November 2021 (UTC) PS: Another little tip for you: Enter as much data as you can in VE. If you can't add what you want, leave some placeholder text like aaaa bbbb ccccc etc in its place. This make it much, much easier to find the right cell to edit late in Source Editor/wikimarkup. Cheers, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:54, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I really don't have words to thank you man. You just helped me beyond imagination. I really did not imagine, you would use your precious time in writing so much for me. I read this page. But could not find any help. But see, you gave me the the necessary page, which has the right information. But I could not find it myself - so foolish. I just sometimes tend to wonder, how some Wikipedians, know about every help page in Wikipedia, and have explored every nook and corner of Wikipedia. They know the exact help pages, for the exact problem, and they know which help page has that needed information. For example see, the page that I was looking into, and the page that you gave me. Such a difference. I thought I might get help from the Visual Editor help page, but you gave me the actual page which has the information that I need, the Help:Table page, under the VE section. Although both the pages may seem to have the same kind of information, but it is a huge difference. And see you also left me a PS: and gave me your great tip. Yes, in that way, it is really easy to find out. Thank you again for helping me learn Wikipedia, and with all the elder Wikipedians' kind help, I am learning so fast. Thanks again. Have a nice Wikipedia career. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes But I cannot figure out one thing, while writing the name of the channel I wrote Itcouldbepossible, but wikipedia is thinking it to be a page, and in the preview section, I see that it is writing like [1], which it thinks to be a link, for further reference you can see that in your sandbox. While yours is not looking like mine. Can you figure out and tell me what is wrong with me. I am always getting confused. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:03, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible The only think "wrong with you" is your wonderful fascination in some of the minutae of Wikipedia. Nerdiness is an asset here, as is a desire to ask questions and to learn. I only hope you then put what you're learning into practice. That's why I was willing to spend time answering someone's technical questions (even though I'm no expert on tables at all - or indeed much else, if I think about it!) The best way to learn from one's errors is first to accept that one must have made a mistake, and then to keep analysing the problem until you suddenly go ahah! that's my mistake. You never forget those types of mistakes, and that's how we learn through life. Although not normally encouraged, I give you permission to go into that section of my sandbox and make an edit there to show me the problem you're encountering. I'm not 100% sure what you're seeing. My link was actually a wikilink to the Teahouse, modified to display my name. (In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity, but might not on yours. A red link is to a page that doesn't exist, whether it's an article page, a user page or something else. The link you've just pasted above was to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/En.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible If you had put it as an external link (using one square bracket), it would look like this: [2] Both would not work becaue you accidentally repeated the en.wikipedia.org elements. You actually needed https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible as an external link, though that would not be appropriate for a table. This also works: Itcouldbepossible - I forced the User: bit to not display by putting a vertical pipe character at the end. Now I think you asked somewhere else about how we learn all this stuff. Watching, reading, doing and making mistakes. It's taken me 10 years of editing to pick up the stuff I'm now happy to share with you, but I was quite able to do most of the basic editing (apart from tables - they're really scary!) after quite a short time. I worry a bit that you're wanting to "run before you can walk", but I hope I've now managed to answer all your various questions. Good luck! Nick Moyes (talk) 11:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes, you are answering all my questions to my content. And you were saying about putting into use what I am learning. Yes, I am doing that. For example when I copied the table from your sandbox to my new tables sandbox, I wrote from whom I have copied the table. What I am wanting to say is that for example I want a wiki link to my talk page, which would show up like "Itcouldbepossible", using the vertical pipe (|) character. Then why cannot I do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very simple. [[User talk:Itcouldbepossible|Itcouldbepossible]] renders as Itcouldbepossible. For help on wikilinks, see Help:Wikilinks. --David Biddulph (talk) 12:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks, that was what I was wanting to do from the beginning. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible If you edit the source to this thread and look at my reply above, you should see exactly how I did it. The alternative is still to use the vertical pipe after your username, but to add different text (either your own name without the User: bit) or as I did when linking you to Albert Einstein! You'll work it out. Nick Moyes (talk) 12:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thank you, I wanted to tell you this from the very beginning. But you could not understand it, anyway, thank you for all the other help that you provided. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Also I want to know how I can turn by wiki redirects to green as you said here - In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:26, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Is it possible to mask external links to read the way I want. I mean Wiki links can be renamed as the editor wishes, is there any way in which external links can be masked, or is it at all possible? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating a page ethically[edit] Creating a page for my boss My boss is adamant that she wants a Wikipedia account (she's a prominent science communication researcher). I think she probably deserves one, but I'm also deeply aware that I'm biased as a prospective page author. Does anyone have any advice for me? I want to make my boss happy, but not by violating Wikipedia guidelines. Lorikie (talk) 14:26, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: You'll need to read and abide by Wikipedia:Conflict of interest. DuncanHill (talk) 14:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lorikie, and welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for being up-front about your situation. Unfortunately, there are some formidable obstacles in the way of you being able to satisfy your boss. As Duncan says, you need to read up about conflict of interest, and further, you need to make the formal declarations that you are a paid editor (it doesn't matter if you are specifically paid to do this, from what you say it is part of your job). Next, you need to drop the idea of "deserving a page", because that assumes that a Wikipedia article is in any way for the benefit of its subject. Of course many people (and other entities) do get some benefit frrom there being a Wikipedia article about them, but that is incidental: Wikipedia has no such purpose, and indeed is indifferent as to whether the subject wants an article about them or does not want an article about them. An article about your boss will not belong to her, will not be under her control, will not necessarily say what she wants it to say, and should be based almost entirely on what people wholly unconnected with her have chosen to publish about her (good or bad!) and not on what she or her associates say or want to say. You might like to show her an article about yourself isn't necessarily a good thing. The counterpart of "deserve" that Wikipedia actually uses is, "does the subject meet Wikipedia's criteria for notability? This is not directly related to prominence, importance, influence, popularity, or any of the other things that you might normally connect with "notability": in essence it is a question of whether there are enough reliably published sources, wholly unconnected with the subject to base an article on. If you and she decide that you still want there to be an article, there are more hurdles. Creating a new article is much more difficult than it looks - I liken it to building a house as your first building project, or playing a public recital after your first violin lesson, and always advise new editors to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" and how Wikipedia works. Editors who do not heed this advice often have a frustrating time as they put in a lot of work and don't understand why their house keeps falling down. Having a conflict of interest you will likely find it even harder, as you will need to basically forget everything you know about your boss, and summarise only what those independent commentators have published. If you decide to go ahead, you need to read your first article, and then use the articles for creation process to create a draft. --ColinFine (talk) 14:57, 23 November 2021 (UTC) If pressed to proceed by your boss, see if there are three or more published articles about her - content at length, not just a name-mention - and then use guidance at Help:Referencing for beginners to create references in proper ref format in your Sandbox. If you cannot find publications about her, then the effort is futile. David notMD (talk) 15:52, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: Is your boss by any chance Laura Lindenfield? If so, I think that you will have a very difficult time finding the sources you'll need for a draft article on a living person in which each and every statement has to have a reliable reference. When I Google her name, I get a number of sources but they are virtually all based on interviews (or are on websites clearly linked to her), so are not WP:INDEPENDENT. The nearest I can find that might be OK is this one at science.org which probably reaches the WP:SIGCOV for notability (specifically in her case WP:NACADEMIC) but still seems, by using language like "She is passionate about...", to take a tone that Wikipedia would not use (see WP:NPOV). Your best bet, I think, is to draft a very short article using such independent sources and then not be too disappointed if the Draft is declined: that will at least prove you have tried! Make sure you start by complying with the mandatory disclosures described at WP:PAID. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Text Allignment[edit] Any idea on text alignment in table. I want to center align some text in tables, using visual editor. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:44, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible I think you'd probably need to use wikisource code for that, using the "text-align:center; parameter. PS: I've tweaked the demo warning you placed on your sandbox page as you'd left the nowiki commands in which stop it from working. So the warning now looks like it's come from me, but obviously isn't a real vandalism warning. The best way to leave warnings is to enable WP:TWINKLE in your Preferences. Then it does it automatically for you via menu options, plus a whole lot more. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thanks for the edit. I know it is not a real vandalism warning. It is just my sandbox. If I had done something wrong, then you would have told me in the talk page. But anyway to get to the point, I have already TWINKLE enabled. I used it to start delete discussions, and got myself blocked for being thought to be a sockpuppet, since that page was created by another sock, and the sock with whom the checkusers thought me to be linked had edit warred with the previous sock. Anyway thats not the point. What you are saying is that it will give me warnings. Can you specify what warning, or what type of warnings??? Also it would be really kind of you, if you could tell me in a more precise way of how to use wikisource code, suddenly while I am writing in normal language. For example I am using "text-align:center" here, but nothing is happening. Please tell me the way, to center text in a table while using visual or source editor. Thanks for the answer, and regards. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible As I replied to you on my sandbox, it's important that you are editing tables and complex entries in WP:Source Editor not Visual Editor. Did you follow my instructions on how to switch between them, and did it work? You will get nowhere with anything other than the simplest of tables if you stick to VE. The parameter I mentioned above is wiki markup - as written with Source Editor. So, go to the table I put in my sandbox for you at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 Click 'Edit Source' next to the heading to open the section in Source Editor. (Tell me if that function is not showing, as it means you've not forced it to display via your personal Preferences setting. My default is for it to offer me both editing tools all the time - it should be yours, too, especially if you're working on tables.) Search for the word 'center' and you'll see 101 examples - one controlling each cell of data. Regarding WP:TWINKLE: Go to your own userpage. Use the drop down menu box marked 'TW' to access the Twinkle menu. The first sub-item is WARN. This opens a menu box for you to explore the various options. Try leaving yourself a first level warning against vandalism, then a second, and then a third. I can't explain all the options here for you - we expect editors to very carefully' learn for themselves how to use these powerful tools (which can easily upset other users). So read the TWINKLE page and the accompanying Documentation to understand what it can do. But it covers most of the common issues of edit waring, content removal, addition of uncited content, harassment, conflict of interest, spamming, plus single issue notices like encouragement to use edit summaries, biting newcomers, etc etc. There is a complete list of warning templates (here). Nick Moyes (talk) 10:33, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes the edit source function is showing. Also I thought that you were telling me of editing error warnings, so I asked what type of warnings. I had pasted that warning in my sandbox just to see how it looks. I knew how to use twinkle. For the table related thing, I want to know where should I place "text-align:center; parameter? I have made my edit on your sandbox. You can see that, and tell me if it is right or wrong. You will see that the table I created, it has some errors. For the channel name column I thought of adding my talk page and then renaming the wiki link as "Itcouldbepossible". But it showed up like this: ([3]) - why??? While your wiki link it redirects it to the teahouse it shows Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel? How come??? Why cannot I edit my wiki link to show my username, while on clicking it redirects to my talk page. For example yours show Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel and it redirects to WP:TH Why is mine not like that?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 11:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Tables[edit] Today I was editing random articles, when I came across Nach Baliye. I was reading the article, trying to find for any errors, when I came across this table [4]. I just sort of went mad seeing this table. Just a well formatted and advanced table, with all the color schemes, and just nice cell merging. Can anyone, for heaven's sake tell me how that table was created with all those attractive features. I don't really think that the Wiki markup was typed out. There must be some modern graphical interface, for doing such a tedious thing. I want to know how that table was created. I would really be glad, if I get the answer from someone who is an expert in this matter, and has been editing Wikipedia for a couple of years, because, I want the exact and precise method of creating such a table. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:58, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I've been editing for over 10 years and wouldn't dare to create such a thing. I have, however, created very long data tables by starting in Excel, getting all the sorting, the text and the wikilinks and in the right places before exporting it with a tool to Wikimarkup. But I'm not aware of a tool to make tables look pretty like that - so I shall await for answers from other users more experienced in such things, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: It takes work, often over time with improvements by different editors, often starting with copying the format from another page. The first similar table in the article was added by an IP here with edit summary "added table like other shows Jhalak". That may refer to Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart or an earlier season. It could maybe be tracked further back but I haven't tried. Help:Table has general help but it's complicated. Much of it is the same or similar as HTML tables which some editors already know. PrimeHunter (talk) 16:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @PrimeHunter Yes, but how did that specific table appear in Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart. How was it created??? And also I wanted to know one thing, how on Earth did you find that specific page history, when the table was added?? I have seen many people doing so. Is their anyway of finding out when a specific edit was first made, and the what edits followed?? I really don't think that you flicked through the page history. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible There are various ways to find when an edit was first made. The slow way is to look at 500 edits in View History at a time. Let's assume that covers the entire history (if not, just increase the number to 5000 in the url bar), then you can find a rough midway point, click (and note down) the date you clicked. Is the edit showing there? IF yes, go down and divide the lower half of edits into half again, and select another date to click. Is the edit there? If 'No', then it will have been made between those two date points. Divide the edits roughly in half again and then again until you find the first one where that edit was made. Doing this in conjunction with looking at View History (green numbers are positive count of bytes added/red are negative overall additions) makes this just a few minutes work. It took me just a few moments to do that for Nach Baliye, speeded up by using Ctrl-F to search for 'Scoring Chart', of which there were 823 mentions in the edit summaries. I went to the lowest one, then scrolled down a dozen or so edits further and found a massive addition by an IP on 9 March 2019 with a very helpful edit summary. Job done. Of course, that's the slow way. For simplest way to find when a short text string was first added to an article is to copy it, then go to the View History tab. Just above all the row entries, click Find addition/removal to use the 'WikiBlame' tool. Be aware that by default it only searches 500 of the latest edits before the date selected. So it will miss the first addition of text if it's a very heavily edited page as this one is unless you spend time to understand how to take advantage of the tool's searching features. I wouldn't use it to search for a chart being added, but I might focus on just one unique element or keyword in that chart. Hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks, I learnt a new thing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 10:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the answer. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Prime Healthcare[edit] My interest in CAlifornia health systems drew me to Prime Healthcare, where I was struck by the difference in how Wiki editors handle the material. Whereas large systems such as Sutter and Kaiser are given the opportunity to list history, background, hospital names, etc, Prime's editing history is aggressive and heavy handed. The result is a page listing controversy and nothing else. Prime owns 45 hospitals nationwide, employs 50000 people, but you wouldn't know it by Wiki. BTW I am in no way affiliated or compensated by Prime; my research is for a graduate program. I'm just amazed at the discrepancy and poor treatment. I haven't researched it enough to determine whether sources should be improved on deleted materials, but that is different than what edit history shows. Any attempts to improve the page are immediately deleted wholesale, in apparent violation of Wiki editing rules. (I attempted to undo some edits myself) Can anyone explain this? Prime owner Prem Reddy has made a number of enemies with his handling of labor, etc. Is that at play here? Archie515 (talk) 16:46, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Prime Healthcare Services Karenthewriter (talk) 17:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Archie515. Welcome to the Teahouse! You can discuss the issue about the content of the article on the article's talk page. The concerned editors might engage in the conversation and help you in finding a possible solution. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 17:24, 23 November 2021 (UTC) thanks but page monitors refuse to allow access and have not responded to talk page requests in the past. Now locked out from making any changes to sources. Page is an embarrassment to all Wiki contributors. Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC)Archie515Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The Controversy section is well supported by reliable published sources. It's Prime Healthcare that should be embarrassed. Maproom (talk) 23:04, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Archie515: I see you posted twice at Talk:Prime Healthcare Services. The last piece of advice you were given there was to make a specific request. I suggest you think about the worst problem with the article, and then post a specific detailed suggestion on the talk page, such as: Please change the current article text "_____________" to "_____________" based on the independent reliable source found at ___________________. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Disambiguation-links tag on redirects[edit] In this edit I intentionally changed a redirect from targeting an article to targeting a disambiguation page. To my surprise, the "adding disambiguation links" tag was added. In a way, it makes sense (I added a link to a disambiguation page), but on the other hand, the tag is probably meant for when someone adds a link in an article without knowing it's a disambiguation page, like if I added a link to Georgia or Mercury in an article. Can something be changed so that this tagging isn't activated when the end result of the edit is a redirect? I reported this at WP:EF/FP but was sent here for a reason I don't understand: the responding editor said both that the tag isn't activated and that it's working properly. 72.77.45.188 (talk) 17:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The edit filter (which interdicts edits) is separate from the tagging system (which describes what an edit is). —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 17:38, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Do anyone think like that?[edit] Are there people actually thinking that this page represents a universal and unbiased point of view? Owerthise (talk) 18:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I think like that. It doesn't seem biased to me. What direction do you think it's biased in? Maproom (talk) 18:43, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think there is such a thing as an universal point of view, certainly not about a topic connected to religion. It looks neutral to me; it may not be perfect (no article is) but there are no obvious problems. --bonadea contributions talk 19:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Owerthise: Welcome to the Teahouse! If you have a specific suggestion to improve the article, please post it on Talk:Muhammad with a reliable source and the {{edit extended-protected}} template, and another editor will review your request. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Help with revision[edit] Hello! I'm trying to revise the first two paragraphs of the Cultural context section of Cueva de las Manos and I need help with it. I've already put in a copy edit request for the whole page with the Guild of Copyeditors, but I was wondering if there was a group/person willing to help with this particular section in the meantime. I'm trying to revise the section in accordance with the following advice of FunkMonk in the talk page: There is some repetition in how you describe the paintings were returned to and were influential for the people throughout many thousands of years, perhaps check if someone of it can be consolidated or made less similar. If anyone would be willing to lend a hand in this respect it would be much appreciated. If there is a better place to ask for such help, I would be grateful if someone could point me there. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Best, Tyrone Madera (talk) 18:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) This might be better for the Talk Page, but one possible way to consolidate this might be to write this instead, which combines two separate statements: However, that so many people contributed to the artwork for thousands of years suggests the cave held great significance for the artists, with earlier groups influencing later ones through a continuous narrative, playing out over millennia. But that's just one possibility. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 18:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing this Ayaelmelegy (talk) 22:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Ayaelmelegy, and welcome to the Teahouse. I'm afraid there is quite a lot you need to do before that draft is publishable. The things that caught my attention are: Remove all the links to interviews. There are restrictions on the use of External links in articles, and in any case Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. Format all the references so that a reviewer can readily evaluate which of them are likely to be most reliable and independent. See REFB, and WP:NONENG. With you anonymous URLs it is hard to see whether your draft establishes that she meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. Remove all the evaluative language. No article should ever describe anything in Wikipedia's voice as "one of the most important" or "much needed". I get that you strongly approve of Hamdy's work, but none of that must come out in the article: it must be a neutral summary of what the independent sources say about her - and if there is criticism, then you should probably summarise that too. (You can quote a source that described something as "important" or "much needed" but you need to make sure that it is a source which is wholly unconnected with the subject). Please also see WP:NOTSOAPBOX. --ColinFine (talk) 23:12, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I did some edits would you please check them? Thank you — Preceding unsigned comment added by Ayaelmelegy (talk • contribs) 00:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) new wikipedia page[edit]  2600:1700:9C80:62E0:89ED:2A1E:FE48:ACD3 (talk) 22:08, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome. If you want to create a new article(not a page), that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content. If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Unregistered users(as well as new accounts) cannot directly create new articles. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) What do you do on this page[edit]  Jenay Ava (talk) 22:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Jenay Ava Welcome to the Teahouse. What we do is welcome new users and assist them with any problems they may encounter whilst editing Wikipedia. We recognise that it can be a steep learning curve to begin with, so we try to make that journey a little smoother for you in the hope that you will stick around and become one of our many regular contributors. Unfortunately, looking at your very first few contributions, I fear you think Wikipedia talk pages might be like a chat forum. They are not, and all we do here is help build the worlds greatest online encyclopaedia, and use the talk pages to assist us in that task. You'd be most welcome to help with this undertaking (6.2 million+ article in English so far), but this place is not a social media chat site. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:40, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Help writing a page[edit] I have the page written and now need to post to wikipedia, I have akk the references. Please help, FletcherEmma (talk) 23:37, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @FletcherEmma welcome to Tea House!. If you want to create a new article, that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content.If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. I have been editing the errors on Draft:Gehad Hamdy for while. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing? Thank you. Ayaelmelegy (talk) 00:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, some things need to be improved: (1) the article must have a lead portion (the introduction should not have a heading), (2) there should not be no links or Arabic letters in section headings, (3) there is too much text in the infobox, and Arabic text isn't needed there. There are other things, but you can start with this. Regards. — Alalch Emis (talk) 00:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) STATUS: Draft nominated for Speedy deletion and creating editor blocked as suspected sock (denies). David notMD (talk) 01:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have overhauled (Major Cleanup) the article (This specifically). Jairus is doing... ?? 02:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ayaelmelegy: Draft:Gehad Hamdy has no references in the "Biography" and "Speak Up" sections. Please add more independent reliable sources to your draft before submitting for AfC. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 06:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) GoingBatty, "Ayaelmelegy" got an indefinite block six hours before your last (and of course well-intentioned) message. -- Hoary (talk) 12:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Ongoing Events Section[edit] What happened with the ongoing events section on both the desktop website and the mobile website? It used to be a nicely categorized, bulleted set of news. But not it's just hyperlinks to specific wikipedia pages. I would use the previous style daily, it was a wonderful source for news. I wonder if there is a good reason for removing it, or if it was potentially even an oversight. Regardless I loved that feature and don't want to lose it :( 47.229.202.202 (talk) 01:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Are you confusing Portal:Current events/Sidebar and Portal:Current events? Both are linked from "In the news" on Main Page, on "Ongoing" and "Other recent events". PrimeHunter (talk) 02:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Rv tags[edit] Hello. Is it possible to remove tags? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Possibly - which tags were you considering removing, and why? GoingBatty (talk) 06:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty, no, I've no reason, I've seen some users who edit without any tags. So I asked. Can the tags be removed without any reason? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: When tags are removed from an article, it's assumed that the problems they highlight have been resolved. If an editor feels that a tag was removed prematurely, they'll add it back at their own discretion. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Tenryuu, I didn't tell about the tags of article. I told about editing tags such as "2017 wikitext editor". Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 07:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: There is a difference between Wikipedia:Tags and Wikipedia:Templates I see you removed the {{under construction}} template from the Carlos Moguel Jr. article in this edit, but you cannot remove the tag "2017 wikitext editor" from the edit. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 07:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Those are not removable. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reftoolbar[edit] How to change the date format for Reftoolbar? from Dmy to mdy. Thanks. —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Welcome to the Teahouse! It appears that there is a discussion about this at Wikipedia talk:RefToolbar#Date formats. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) User level[edit] Hi, I wanted to know how I can add a user level. I mean there will be a bar on my user page, and it will fill up as I edit articles. And beside it would be written, my next user level. Any idea on how to do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Here's a workaround, Itcouldbepossible. Just edit articles, constructively. Soon you will be "extended confirmed". Most people are, and few people will be surprised or much interested to know that you are. There are some other very minor superpowers that you can acquire; but again, few people will be interested. Some superpowers are a bit out of the ordinary, and you might want to advertise one or other of these; on the other hand, advertising them may seem somewhat vulgar. Best is to aim to be an article-improving Clark Kent. -- Hoary (talk) 11:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible Welcome to Tea House! As @Itcouldbepossible stated, it's rarely of interest to anyone else. This essay on WP:HATCOLLECTING could be useful on the mostly harms/some benefits of gamifying your user page with statistics. I do indulge myself with Wikipedia:Service awards as a way of marking specific tiers of editing. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 12:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Dead Links[edit] I see that many pages have something called 'dead links'. What are these so called 'dead links', and how can I make them alive again?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) For information about dead links, read WP:Dead links. --David Biddulph (talk) 09:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks again for the answer Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Add (journalist) to title[edit] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anshuman_Tiwari Can you write this in brackets as journalist because it is journalist? You can write Journalist in back of their name in brackets. Coolblack4 (talk) 10:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Coolblack4, and welcome to the Teahouse. We use a term in parenthesis like that in an article title only when it is necessary to distinguish between different people (or other subjects) with the same name. See WP:Disambiguation. --ColinFine (talk) 11:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Something drastic certainly should be done to this article. Sample: In digital journalism, he has created and successfully established an innovative and exclusive multilingual digital first content vertical moneybhaskar.com for Danik Bhaskar Group, DB Corp. It is the largest Hindi business portal and offers guidance, utility and wisdom based jargon free economic-business and investment content to aspiring readers in Hindi. (For one thing, I wonder what is being excluded.) -- Hoary (talk) 12:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Distracting AFC submission templates[edit] Does anyone know how to collapse or get the "this topic is not notable" AFC submission templates out of the way? I'm trying to work on a draft article, and they're distracting and take up about half of the page. wizzito | say hello! 12:43, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Those templates were put there for the benefit of reviewers, and of anyone who might want to work on improving the draft. You should not remove or collapse them. That's why they all say "Do not remove this line!" Maproom (talk) 13:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thing is, they are INCREDIBLY distracting to look at, I at least want to move them to the bottom at the page if I can't collapse or make them invisible. I just can't have them taking up 90% of the page from the top, it bothers me a lot and prevents me from working. wizzito | say hello! 13:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Reality shifting has been Declined three times and Rejected twice. I have restored the Declined and Rejection and Comments to the top of the article, where those belong. David notMD (talk) 14:23, 24 November 2021 (UTC) If you believe you can rescue this with better references, do so, but be aware that Rejected drafts are likely to be deleted and 'salted.' Make sure you have an off-Wikipedia copy. And understand that 'salted' means that an Administrator's approval would be needed to try again to create a draft on this topic. David notMD (talk) 14:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there seriously no way to get these to the bottom of the page (where they are still visible) or make them look less distracting? Your comments aren't helping me, sorry. Also, I am still working on the article; I had to rewrite it from scratch because the original user who created the draft made it look very bad and had bad formatting and grammar. (Also, they kept resubmitting it multiple times despite not addressing the concerns, I haven't submitted it yet.) It isn't anything speedy deletable (see Wikipedia:Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity), there's a Washington Post report and a scholarly article on the subject, but probably just needs to be worked on and more RS might need to be made before it gets published. wizzito | say hello! 14:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Declines and Rejections are considered a required part of draft history, so that the next reviewer can check if the weaknesses identified by previous reviewers have been addressed. Given that you have taken over a draft created and edited by other editors, you can leave a Comment to that effect with the other Comments. David notMD (talk) 14:39, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there no way to at least move it to a part of the page where it's visible by people contributing and reviewers, but not as distracting as a glob that takes up the first part of the page? If not, I may just have to move it to my userspace and work on it from there. wizzito | say hello! 14:42, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David notMD noting for the record I have reverted you; @Wizzito offers up a convincing reason why they moved them down, because it was distracting for them, and as long as they move them back up before resubmitting I see no issue with that move. That is ignoring the question whether or not these templates are relevant at all considering the rewrite currently ongoing, although it appears that at least some of the original text still exists. -- Asartea Talk | Contribs 15:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have added a Comment that you are in the process of completely revising the draft. Do as much as you can before submitting. I know nothing about the topic, but will mention that as it stand now, the lead is over-referenced. Pick at most three refs to support the Lead. Those refs and the others may be used in the body of the article, as more detail on history, reception, criticism, etc. is added. David notMD (talk) 14:47, 24 November 2021 (UTC) That's because I was working on it, putting the references in so I can use them later, and then delete the ref in the lead when I've finished reviewing the source and using it to source statements. You act like a draft should have the same standards as mainspace, and besides, I moved it to userspace anyways so I can work on it. wizzito | say hello! 14:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You didn't move it, you copied & pasted the content, so please read about copying within Wikipedia. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I want to pitch in from an outside editor. 5 declined templates, 2 separate comments, and 1 draft template? I know if I was unaware of all Wikipedia policies, this would feel very WP:BITEy to me. Is there not a better solution, in the form of an {{articlehistory}} style template? I understand why the need for all the notices (for future reviewers to know at a glance), but there can be so many better ways to do this now. --JackFromWisconsin (talk | contribs) 14:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I feel like a lot of people in this thread are being BITEy too... wizzito | say hello! 15:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My intention was to proffer advice on how to create a draft that is more likely to be accepted. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I understand, but I feel as if my questions weren't answered and were just met with a "don't do this" or "don't do that" and reverts. wizzito | say hello! 15:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Tendentious editing[edit] This is not marked as an essay. This is also not marked with the green symbol for policy, guidelines pages. So, how important are these types of guideline pages? Knight Skywalker (talk) 12:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very important. It's a supplementary explantion to the guideline WP:DE, and carries the same status. Mjroots (talk) 13:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Mjroots: If this is very important, then why Wikipedia is not including the green symbol in the box? --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I didn't use the bold format, but still the above lines are showing as in bold to me. --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You used the bold format by putting a semi-colon before the colon at the start of the line. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I've fixed the bold. Mjroots (talk) 16:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) This page is not one of Wikipedia's policies or guidelines, as it has not been thoroughly vetted by the community. Also it has category. Wikipedia essays (?) (±) Knight Skywalker (talk) 17:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Markup[edit] Is there any introduction page, or help page, or user guide page for Wikipedia Markup. If there is then please provide me. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Itcouldbepossible, you may be looking for Help:Wikitext. DanCherek (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks for the Wiki Help page, I am surely going to read it. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Page[edit] As you see now, my talk page has become a little clumsy. What is the way to make it clean? Should I archive them or is there any other option? Seeking for options. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: While you're allowed to delete conversations from your own talk page, archiving is recommended because it makes it more convenient for you and other editors to find those old conversations in the future. There are a few different ways to archive a talk page – you can do it manually or have a bot help you – and there is more information about each of those at Help:Archiving a talk page. DanCherek (talk) 14:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek I have archived the archival messages left by a bot on my talk page and have shifted them here. But I cannot move the three notification to three different headings, it is coming under a single heading. Please can you help me in that respect. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The first section starts with {| so you need to end it with |}. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Newcomers[edit] How, can I find all newcomers on Wikipedia??? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:08, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: You can find them at Special:Log/newusers but for what purpose ? 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA (talk) 15:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) IP blocking for 31 hours[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… I hope you don’t mind me asking this question: When administrators impose a block on IP addresses for the first time, the length of the block is usually 31 hours (1 day, 7 hours). Do you have any idea why administrators chose this value? Thanks. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 15:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC). It's so that they don't just wait 24 and return to the same things. 31h is also a standard length in the blocking dropdown menu and has been since before I was an admin. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Imagine a kid messing around in study hall, causing a school's IP to be blocked. A 24-hour block would allow him or her to come back the next day during the same period to cause more trouble. Deor (talk) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Amkgp is Sock editing[edit] Hi, first I was blocked on the ground of thinking to be a sockpuppet, and the sockpuppet investigation was raised by an ipv6 ip 2402:3A80:6E1:9A2E:A110:65A0:5AD7:4F15. The sock investigation page is here. In the Clerk, CheckUser, and/or patrolling admin comments section Blablubbs commented and said The filer is obviously Amkgp loutsocking. I blocked them for a bit. Then after the block expired then again another comment was added by ipv6 user 2402:3A80:1A4E:9197:C5B8:CED1:C0FD:9A1D, and then blablubbs blocked the ipv6 again. When it was proved that I am not a sockpuppet, this ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:A17E:9C61:AA1F:59E2:32A2 came and added welcomed me. Till date, I could not understand anything, why an ipv6 was coming an leaving me messages on my talk page. Today again an ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA came and gave me a vandalism warning on an edit that I made two articles namely, Piet van der Sluijs and Dré Saris, where I had only added a more reference needted tag using twinkle. It was my mistake or not is a far matter, but then he leaves me another link to learn wikipedia in under an hour link. He also answers one of my questions in the teahouse. The thing is all these ipv6 start with 2402:3A80, and blablubbs has stated previously that it is block evasion of sock amkgp. Now what is to be done? Should I raise a sockpuppet investigation request?? Would it be possible to block just huge range ipv6s? Please give me suggestion in this matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 16:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Also in there sockpuppet investigation page [[5]] we can see that the suspected sock puppets ipv6 also starts with 2402:3A80. We can also see that he got blocked because he used to edit logged out for a couple of time, and he was blocked for that reason. And also in a further section we see that he also used or uses 2409:4061::/36 this ipv6 range. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Itcouldbepossible (talk • contribs) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Article Not Published - not adequate sources[edit] Hi, I am trying to publish an article about a triceratops skull nicknamed 'Dragon King' which was sold last year which is the biggest skull ever found, but the article was rejected due to a lack of sources. The sale was private so there wasn't a lot of press generated, but what there was is referenced. The skull is definitely the biggest in the world. How would I go about validating that? Would an image of the skull with dimensions count? What could I use to validate it. Any suggestions would be very welcome. I should make clear that I have no financial stake in this at all, it is simply a fact that the skull is the biggest found and I think should be public information. Maudjohnson90 (talk) 16:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Maudjohnson90 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Wikipedia articles summarize what publicly available independent reliable sources say about a topic. If a topic is not sufficiently covered in such sources, it cannot be on Wikipedia. Documents in private hands or otherwise not available to the public cannot be used as sources here. Did no sources cover this sale, or its discovery? If some did, but not enough for a standalone article, there may be an existing article this could be mentioned in. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Shouldn't you first put any reliable information at Triceratops#Size, Maudjohnson90? That's a pretty well-watched article and if you think that particular skull needs another full article, you could discuss that on the Talk Page at Talk:Triceratops Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:59, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks Mike Turnbull! I have added information under Triceratops#Skull and that has remained since I added it. I'll discuss on the Talk Page as suggested. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Maudjohnson90 (talk • contribs) 17:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Final Publish[edit] Hello Sir, how much time does it take for the draft to get finally published ? Thank you. Johnalphanso (talk) 17:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You have not created nor submitted a draft to Articles for Creation. Is there a particular draft you are interested in? — Preceding unsigned comment added by David notMD (talk • contribs) 18:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Johnalphanso, and welcome to the Teahouse. There is no simple answer to your quewstion: a draft takes as long to be published as it takes. There is no queue, no schedule, no deadline: all editors are volunteers, and work on what they choose when they choose. If you're talking about Draft:Sanskar Desai, that will not get reviewed until it is submitted for review (add {{subst:AFC/draft}} to the top). But it will not get accepted until somebody follows Theroadislong's advice in the comment and removes all the unreliable sources from the list. It will likely not get accepted until somebody reformats the references from a useless list of URLs to a meaningful set of citations - see CITE. There are probably other things that need improving too: in particular, the question of whether it has been worked on by a paid editor. --ColinFine (talk) 18:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How do I contribute images?[edit]  Bettertoseeit (talk) 19:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Bettertoseeit Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please review WP:UPIMAGE carefully. It's not as easy to do as it may appear. You must be autoconfirmed(account is four days old with 10 edits or more) to upload images yourself, but you can visit Files for upload to get assistance with doing so if not autoconfirmed. 331dot (talk) 19:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating Book Pages[edit] Hello. One of the reasons I became an editor was an interest in filling some of the gaps in bibliographies I am familiar with. What I'm unsure about is if an author has a large bibliography with Wiki articles already created for most of their books (for example; Stephen Baxter bibliography), am I safe in assuming I can create pages for those novels which do not have an article, or might the lack of an article be for a reason? Thanks in advance. John Bullock (talk) 20:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Such novels still have to be independently notable. Ruslik_Zero 20:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Jbullock83 Welcome to Tea House! In general, a notable author does not mean their books are automatically notable and vice versa, see WP:NOTINHERIT, however in the book specific Wikipedia:Notability (books) guidelines, it does mention certain famous authors' books are likely to be automatically notable. Anything by Jane G. Austin for example, but another editor may disagree. Looking at specific notability criteria for the books themselves would be the most forward process. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 20:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the info/reply! Ruslik, Shushugah. John Bullock (talk) 21:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) ASIAN MONTH[edit] i would like to ask if my translated ( not fully complete article counts for the ediathon asian month in order to get a postcard Georgekagian (talk) 21:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian Welcome to Tea House! Your question is better asked on Wikipedia talk:Wikipedia Asian Month/2021 but if you add {{WAM talk 2021}} to the talk page of said article, a WikiProject judge will determine its eligibility for you. I doubt a full translation is needed, since each article can be independently edited anyways. It needs to comply with English Wikipedia WP:5 Principles whereas it may differ in other languages. Thank you for the question and happy editing! Good luck with the edit-a-thon! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 21:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian, looking at here, it looks like it counts unless it was a pure machine translation (e.g. Google Translate) that you didn't copy edit to correct any errors. {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 21:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) What did I do wrong?[edit] I'm the guy who created the article for Legends of the Multiverse: Draft:Legends of the Multiverse, just wondering why you rejected it? LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. The reason for the decline(not rejection) was left by the reviewer at the top of the draft. Do you have specific questions about it? 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) In short, your draft seems to have no sources. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The fan film does not have any progress on the production yet, why do you expect it to be full of sources? Sources will only be added during production. (also i'm new here on wikipedia so i don't know what exactly are sources) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Please review what a reliable source is. If no independent reliable sources have written about your film, showing how it meets the special Wikipedia definition of a notable film, it cannot be written about on Wikipedia. Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about something. If you have further comment, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. Please also review conflict of interest. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) "Legends of the Multiverse is widely regarded as among one of the greatest film series ever made", but "Production will begin in 5 December 2021." I see why this draft has been described as a blatant hoax. Maproom (talk) 22:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Calculating and "fixing" Hubble's Constant using light speed (C) and Pi only.[edit] Is it possible to to use the following equation as a Hubble Constant value for reference purposes only on the Hubble Chart page? It is unique in the fact no measuring processes are involved, so accuracy of Hubble's Constant is as good as the inputted speed of light :-  2 X a Megaparsec X C, divided by Pi to the power of 21 =  71 Kilometres / Second / Megaparsec
 For this equation, a Parsec is the standard 3.26 light years. C is light speed in Kilometres / Second, and Pi is 3.142....... This equation "fixes" Hubble's Constant directly and precisely to light speed (C) and Pi. As this equation is original, there are no references, but it has been tested, and has successfully withstood many challenges since 2008. I am quite happy if it were used anonymously, due to the fact there are no references. The lack of external references was (rightly) the reason it was rejected as a stand alone article / submission. No copyrights are involved, as it is purely lifted from my work (Astrogeometry), and is not the work of anyone else I feel its anonymous inclusion on the Hubble Chart page would stimulate new interest in what has now become a "Hubble Constant stalemate". Sincerely, ClownBojo ClownBojo (talk) 22:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Interesting. The same theory was advanced several years ago here on Wikipedia by a user named David Michael Hine. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 22:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Please read no original research, ClownBojo. Unless several independent people have written about the equation in reliable sources, it does not belong in Wikipedia. Period. --ColinFine (talk) 23:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong?[edit] But the movie is overall just an idea from my mind, I'm actually making this movie with my two best friends. So technically, I wouldn't call it a "hoax" since it's actually coming to YouTube. Did you even read the entire article? If you don't want an article related to my fan film in this site, where else do I put it? (p.s. irrelevant question: do you like the idea of my fan film trilogy?) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) "where else do I put it?" Facebook, maybe. Maproom (talk) 22:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Yes, Wikpedia is not for people to tell the world about what they do. When the New York Times or CNN or BBC write about your film, then someone independent of you will write an article about it. Until then, you will need to use social media. 331dot (talk) 22:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Re: Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong?[edit] I don't use Facebook and which specific social media do I share the movie's existence? LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 23:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI anywhere else but here. Please stop creating a new section for each question. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Make a YouTube video telling the world that you are making a film. 331dot (talk) 23:12, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Basically I think you may benefit from reading WP:NOT & internalizing what it says about what Wikipedia is not, you may find it imperative. Celestina007 (talk) 23:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You can also have a look at WP:OUT, LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI. --ColinFine (talk) 23:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Fair use[edit] Why are fair use resolutions lowered? It doesn’t make sense that Wikipedia lowers resolution on fair use images. Other wikis don’t do this. Alex Mitchell of The Goodies (talk) 23:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Asian month[edit] I try to sumbit my article in the asian month ediathon-contest in order to get a postcard but its not working. The link that wikipedia has shared is broken it says error 500 please any help? Georgekagian (talk) 23:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1057021003" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 23:27 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statementhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse Wikipedia:Teahouse - Wikipedia Wikipedia:Teahouse From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Help forum for new users Shortcuts WP:TEA WP:TH GoingBatty, a Teahouse host Welcome to the Teahouse! A friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia Ask a question Question forumMeet your hostsArticles to improveBecome a host New to Wikipedia? See our tutorial for new editors or introduction to contributing page. Note: Newer questions appear at the bottom of the Teahouse. Completed questions are archived within 3 days. Please remember to sign your posts by typing four keyboard tildes like this: ~~~~. Help Wikipedia To read the newest questions, skip to bottom About the Teahouse Contents 1 Autoconfirmed user 2 Template:Uw-create-kept 3 Audio sample 4 How to create Article page for Musical Artist 5 section formatting 6 Citing Manga 7 Problem with visual editor 8 How can I remove a website from spam or black list? 9 Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page 10 Verify my article and undelete it 11 "Can you plz help" 12 Sandbox 13 Biology 14 Help moving my draft 15 Paw partol 16 Reaching a consensus 17 I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page 18 Why i cant see my name on wikipedia?? 19 Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps 20 pokemon showdown 21 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath 22 I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ? 23 A Request to add Template to talk page 24 Is Imslp a good source to back up my information? 25 Vandalism 26 My Talk Archives vanished 27 Heading correction 28 Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search? 29 how do i seen how many edits i have 30 English 31 Science 32 Bold, Italics, or Quotes? 33 Visual Editing 34 Creating a page ethically 35 Text Allignment 36 Wiki Tables 37 Prime Healthcare 38 Disambiguation-links tag on redirects 39 Do anyone think like that? 40 Help with revision 41 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 42 new wikipedia page 43 What do you do on this page 44 Help writing a page 45 Draft:Gehad Hamdy 46 Ongoing Events Section 47 Rv tags 48 Reftoolbar 49 User level 50 Dead Links 51 Add (journalist) to title 52 Distracting AFC submission templates 53 Wikipedia:Tendentious editing 54 Wikipedia Markup 55 My Talk Page 56 Newcomers 57 IP blocking for 31 hours 58 Amkgp is Sock editing 59 Article Not Published - not adequate sources 60 Final Publish 61 How do I contribute images? 62 Creating Book Pages 63 ASIAN MONTH 64 What did I do wrong? 65 Calculating and "fixing" Hubble's Constant using light speed (C) and Pi only. 66 Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong? 67 Re: Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong? 68 Fair use 69 Asian month Most recent archives 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130, 1131, 1132 Autoconfirmed user[edit] Hello. I would like to become an autoconfirmed user to can change two sections of the article concerning the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship; concretely the sections about the drivers' and constructors' standings. Thank you very much yet for the answer. Truly yours, Patrick Vedel Patrick Vedel (talk) 16:12, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel Welcome to the Teahouse. Actually, you are already 'auto-confirmed', having been here for more than four days and having made over 10 edits. Nick Moyes (talk) 17:16, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Thank you very much for the answer. But If I'm already an autoconfirmed user, why can't I edit the "Drivers'" and "Constructors' standings" sections of the article about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship? Patrick Vedel (talk) 17:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Patrick Vedel For follow up comments, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. What message do you get when you attempt to edit? You are long autoconfirmed and should be able to edit the article, the protection should not affect you. 331dot (talk) 17:42, 20 November 2021 (UTC) I get the following messages/notes: "Note: This page is semi-protected so that only autoconfirmed users can edit it. If you need help getting started with editing, please visit the Teahouse."; "10:54, 8 July 2021 Deepfriedokra talk contribs protected 2021 Formula One World Championship [Edit=Require autoconfirmed or confirmed access] (expires 10:54, 8 January 2022) (Persistent disruptive editing) (hist) Tag: Twinkle (thank)". Because of that, I can't edit the article, concretely the both sections I'd like to edit. Patrick Vedel (talk) 18:49, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Patrick Vedel, you should be able to close that note and proceed with editing. On pages you can't edit, the edit button will be replaced with a "view source" button. Regards! Usedtobecool ?? 18:04, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Tank you very much for the precision, I'll remember it. Patrick Vedel (talk) 19:36, 20 November 2021 (UTC) Yep, @Patrick Vedel you should just close that and/or any other notes you might have and proceed to edit said article. WaterflameIsAwesome (talk) 21:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Template:Uw-create-kept[edit] This template would be used when a user created a page that was under discussion, and the result is to keep it. It would display: Hello! A page you created, [[{{{1}}}]], was under discussion and the result was to keep it. Please use the sandbox for any tests, and consider using the Article Wizard. For more information about creating articles, you may want to read Your first article. You may also want to read our introduction page to learn more about contributing. If you are unsure whether a page fits our page guidelines, it's probably best not to create it. Thank you.  Faster than Thunder (talk) 16:15, 20 November 2021 (UTC) @Faster than Thunder What is the purpose of this post and the one below it, please? Nick Moyes (talk) 17:22, 20 November 2021 (UTC) They would indicate that the discussion of a page a user created resulted in it being kept. Faster than Thunder (talk) 19:00, 20 November 2021 (UTC) If the user successfully created a page and it was deemed worthy of keeping, then they probably don’t need the instructions / admonishments in sentences 2-5. ? Pelagic ( messages ) 20:37, 20 November 2021 (UTC) The sentences 2 - 5 are there in case they don't know about them. Faster than Thunder (talk) 06:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Audio sample[edit] Hello, i saw audio samples on some articles, what are the guidelines for that? Can you upload through wiki commons or somewhere else? Thanks Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 03:02, 21 November 2021 (UTC) If an audio file either (a) is unambiguously in the public domain or (b) has explicitly been released under a copyleft license acceptable to Wikimedia Commons, and if the audio file would benefit one or more articles, then you're welcome to upload it to Wikimedia Commons. Most pop music and the like is conventionally copyright ("all rights reserved"), and neither copyleft or in the public domain; samples from this material are also neither copyleft or in the public domain. If you're not sure whether a file is eligible for upload to Commons, the place to ask about it is the copyright page of Commons' "village pump". -- Hoary (talk) 09:33, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Dawit S Gondaria If you have an audio or a video file that you made yourself and own the copyright to, it's still possible Commons won't accept it. This is because certain popular file formats are encoded using licenced software that is incompatible with Commons licencing. The solution would be to convert it into an acceptable file format. See WP:AUDIO for more details. I then visit and use zamzar.com for converting them online at no cost, which I find really effective. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:22, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Hoary: & @Nick Moyes: thank you for guidance. Dawit S Gondaria (talk) 07:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) How to create Article page for Musical Artist[edit]  Jasonseah69 (talk) 23:45, 21 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69 Welcome to the Teahouse, and thank you for asking. Creating a Wikipedia article from scratch is the hardest task for anyone to achieve here - especially for a newcomer. Trying to write one about yourself is fraught with problems and issues, and will be seen as WP:PROMOTION. See our Conflict of Interest and AUTOBIOGRAPHY advice, too. But most of all, see WP:NMUSIC - this is a shortcut link to our essential Notability criteria for musicians. If you cannot find multiple, independent, in-depth sources that have written about you in detail (ignore your own PR output), and you don't meet any of the music notability criteria, then I'm afraid there's no chance. But if you feel you do meet those criteria, it's still best to leave it to someone who wants to write about you - not try to do it yourself. That person should then gain experience in editing here for some time, and then read This Guide on creating an article and submitting it for review through our Articles for Creation process, before it goes through our final 'New Page Review' process and is allowed to remain in the encyclopaedia. That's a brief outline of the process. Please do not attempt to use your Wikipedia WP:USERPAGE to write about yourself, or it will be deleted. Nick Moyes (talk) 00:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Good advice above. NB take "someone who wants to write about you" to mean "someone who, unprompted, wants to write about you". Not somebody asked (let alone paid) to do so. -- Hoary (talk) 00:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Jasonseah69: Welcome to the teahouse. You can create an article, or just submit using a draft for the Articles for Creation. However, if there aren't any sources, if may be deleted, so take your own risks for creating an article, or for less risks, create a draft. To create one, go to Wikipedia:Draft. Severestorm28 (talk) 00:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Severestorm28, please be aware that Jasonseah69 has only made three edits, is not autoconfirmed, and therefore cannot create an article directly. Also, their user page has been deleted as G11 - unambiguous advertising or promotion. Cullen328 (talk) 01:26, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cullen328: Next time-if someone is not autoconfirmed, and advertising, I'm giving them a warning. Thanks for the reminder. Severestorm28 (talk) 14:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) section formatting[edit] I had a draft reviewed and the reviewer suggested I use "==Section Formatting==". I cannot find any information on ==Section Formatting== on any of the help pages. Can someone send me a link which explains what ==Section Formatting== is and how to implement it? I appreciate the review and suggestions. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Looking at your draft, it's divided into headings using bold text titles, which isn't how articles are typically ordered here. If you replace the bold formatting on your section titles with two equals signs on either side, it'll create a more traditional section header for each title, which also then forces the page to create a table of contents and allows easier navigation. ??????? ? 00:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Thank You. SharedHeritage (talk) 00:47, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage COURTESY: Draft:Peebles Homestead You fixed that, but there are other problems. Several descriptive paragraphs have no references. Much of the content about his military service is general history, i.e., not about him (nor is it about the house). Hence, not relevant. David notMD (talk) 02:09, 22 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) your draft has great promise. The section on the homestead today used one reference source three times, so I reformatted the citations so that the references are combined. You did a good job of finding references, can any of your sources be used for paragraphs that have no references? If not, where did you find the data about the house dimensions and construction details? If it was from a published source (such as a history book or local newspaper article) those can be used as a reference. Unfortunately, if it was from an unpublished source (such as handwritten notes found at a historical society) that would be considered original research and can't be used as a reference. You'll need to do some more work on your draft, but I'm sure it can be improved enough to be accepted. Keep up the good work. Karenthewriter (talk) 09:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Ownership gap between 1838 and 1994. David notMD (talk) 10:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Karenthewriter, Thanks for combining my multiple citations; I couldn't figure that out! The dimensions for the house (and other observations) came from me. I measured the house to see if the dimensions matched the 1798 Tax records, but I'm sure I can find them in other sources, especially the State Museum Survey. Also, I think the few sentences about Peebles' military record are relevant, because his military service adds credibility to the comment that the property could be eligible for the National Register. Without a notable person, places like Monticello and Montpelier would just be old brick houses. I could insert his military service elsewhere. Thoughts? Granted, Peebles service and the Cumberland County Militia could be separate articles which I can't do right now. I will clean up my citations. SharedHeritage (talk) 01:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @SharedHeritage: To answer your original question, see MOS:SECTIONS. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 05:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) SharedHeritage (talk) I'm glad I could help with your multiple citations. I've been an editor since 2007 and I just recently mastered that skill. There's a lot to learn. As David notMD stated the information about Peebles military service isn't about the homestead you're writing about, so a reviewer might feel its unnecessary. (I'm not a reviewer, so I am no expert on that subject.) You mention Peebles received two different land grants. Did he receive any of his land due to his military service? If so you could state that, which would tie in the homestead with him being in the military. I live in northwest Pennsylvania, and some of the area's earliest settlers apparently received land because of their Revolutionary War service, so that's why I asked about the land grants. One thing you need to be aware of is that Wikipedia does not want any original research, or writers speculating on what happened. (To quote Sergeant Friday from the old TV show Dragnet – "Just the facts, ma'am.") So I'm a bit concerned about such phrases as "it is reasonable to believe that the windows are original..." and "The two front doors were likely replaced at this time," for that reads as though you are guessing or giving an opinion. You can quote someone and say that researcher Joe Smart-Guy believes the windows are original, and give a reference citation, but don't make it sound as though it's your conclusion. Remember that you're writing an encyclopedia article for the general reading public, and not trying to convince a historical commission to add the house to the National Register. I hope I'm not overwhelming your with details, but I'm aware that writing for Wikipedia means following Wikipedia rules. Best wishes on your research and writing project. Karenthewriter (talk) 05:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Citing Manga[edit] Hi, I'm new to Wikipedia. I am currently trying to figure out how to add a small detail to a page about Kennedy Space Center in Pop Culture. I'm wondering how I should cite the manga volumes of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure for the details I need. Should I use a pre-existing source on Wikipedia to the volumes that links to the publisher's website, or should i use the ISBN and author info as my citation? Cheese420 (talk) 04:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Author, book title, place, publisher, year, ISBN, and page number, Cheese420. And perhaps additional info besides, such as details of the original publication. -- Hoary (talk) 05:19, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Cheese420 I'm going to disagree with @Hoary here. For a WP-pop cult section, you don't cite the manga, you cite a WP:RS that noticed that the manga had the KSC in it and bothered to write something about it, like at least some of the films are mentioned at [1]. Anything in that section without a decent secondary source should be removed. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) That would be better, yes. (But I'd rather got the impression that that was a lost cause.) If a secondary source comments on the pop culture item and one can cite the former, wouldn't the listing be more informative if publication details of the pop culture item itself were supplied as well? -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I will not object to adding primary source as well, but personally I wouldn't bother. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Compare, for example, Death Note at Donald Trump in popular culture. Warning, the DT article has some scary stuff. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 09:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Shocking stuff indeed, Gråbergs Gråa Sång. Not least the revelation that "Trump has an article on the online encyclopedia Wikipedia." (Well I never!) -- Hoary (talk) 11:22, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I may have to disagree here too, that does seem the least shocking item to me ;-) Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 11:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Problem with visual editor[edit] When I edit wikitables using Visual Editor, the tools doesn't work, I'm trying to edit a text within the table but whenever I tap the wikitable, it goes lock. Can anyone help me? Anyone? —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 05:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Could you tell us which table in which article you're trying to edit? The most common cause that I can think of is that the table's cells are created with templates instead of the usual table syntax, but I have to see the table itself to know. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 09:46, 22 November 2021 (UTC) In filmography table. After seeing this problem, I've tried to edit in other device, but still not working. Maybe only mobile user can experience this problem. The Visual editor was okay before, it works well, but it is not working now. It's not a template, it's wikitable, could you please help me, I can't edit using visual editor—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 12:04, 22 November 2021 (UTC) The question you were asked was "which table in which article"? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Blp articles, or almost all articles that has wikitable. I'm using VE until now because of referencing. But using VE to edit wikitables, doesn't work when using a mobile. The VE is working properly before—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 13:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Please provide the specific name of one article where you are having this issue. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 05:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty: Try to look my sandbox, there is a draft article with a table there. I can't link specific article, because I'm having this problem in all articles that has a table, my example is my sandbox—It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: I had no problem editing the wikitable on user:Ctrlwiki/sandbox with VisualEditor with my Windows 10 PC and Google Chrome. What hardware/software are you using? Are you using the Wikipedia app? Or are you using browser on your phone (in mobile view or desktop view)? What do you mean "it goes lock"? Could you please provide a screenshot of that situation? GoingBatty (talk) 15:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How can I remove a website from spam or black list?[edit] Hello I created a page in the sandbox and requested it to be reviewed. For this post, I used various sources, including a site, which I later found out it was blocked. Is it possible for me to request and remove the site from spam or blacklist? How? Also, is there a way to edit my written draft? AlexJan24 (talk) 06:31, 22 November 2021 (UTC) hi AlexJan24! your draft is located at Draft:Bitumen penetration testing, feel free to input that in the search bar (including the Draft: prefix) to get to your draft. as for the blacklisted site, what source are you trying to use? theremay be a reason over at WP:RSP as to why it's blacklisted. if you want to add a whitelist for a page in there, you can hop over to MediaWiki talk:Spam-whitelist and request there to whitelist it for your article (but don't forget to read WP:Reliable sources first!). happy editing!  melecie  t - 06:42, 22 November 2021 (UTC) thank you @Melecie! :) I want to use this URL: {infinitygalaxy.org/bitumen-penetration-test/} I am pretty sure that it has a good and reliable information. AlexJan24 (talk) 08:15, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @AlexJan24 This is a commercial website, and content like that is often placed on them to help promote their business and public perception. Can you not find something more academic and less dependent of one particular company? How about https://www.academia.edu/37842763/Penetration_Test_on_Bituminous_Materials ? Nick Moyes (talk) 10:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello Nick Moyes, thank you for your suggestion! :) actually, the page you mentioned is good, but does not have the content I want. Moreover it is paid content not free. I am a petrochemical engineer. In fact, I have decided to write about such tests, which are very important and useful in the industry. As compared to other sites, I find this one to have more complete content. AlexJan24 (talk) 13:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Follow-up to Factual changes to the BDR Thermea page[edit] Hi guys I'm still feeling a bit lost. I have some factually updated text I would like to add to the BDR Thermea page. I have made my identity and intentions clear and being open, honest and upfront. There is no marketing-speak in the text. Please advise how I can place this new text. TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) TracyMelass (talk) 09:52, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass: As said before, you should file an edit request on the talk page at Talk:BDR Thermea by following the instructions listed at {{Request edit}}. Even though you think the text is neutral, it may not be by Wikipedia's strict standards, so it'd still be better for more experienced editors to take a second look at it before it goes into the article. ? ?Ganbaruby!??(talk) 10:00, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @TracyMelass The best approach is to find the worst-offending sentences. For each one, create a new line and state: For [insert incorrect sentence here] please replace with ['insert better-worded sentence here] [add the url to a reliable source]. Then move on to the next issue and do the same. I fear you may have dumped a huge rewrite request on the talk page which I, for one, would not want to have to deal with. "Slowly slowly catchee monkey" as, I believe, they say. Nick Moyes (talk) 13:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Nick Moyes Thought I was making things easier for the editors! :) No harm intended. This is my thinking: Removed outdated text, updated facts and figures, and added a par on their new strategic focus. The company has undergone has lot of change since the original text was created. Have endeavoured to keep it short, sharp and factual and externally validated where I can. Still incorrect? I am no coder and find it really hard to navigate around Wikipedia. Sorry to be a bother but any help really appreciated.TracyMelass (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Verify my article and undelete it[edit]  Itswajidshaikh00 (talk) 11:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft_talk:Wajid_shaikh I see a draft whose text is "Hey team, i just created a page of living person autobiography with reliable sources and references citations kindly give me a hope to verifiy my new article". What I don't see is a biography of any kind. As for autobiographies, you're at the wrong website. -- Hoary (talk) 11:27, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You have since been indefinitely blocked. You must succeed in appealing your block to have your account reinstated. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) FTR: Wikipedia:Sockpuppet investigations/Iwajidshaikh. --bonadea contributions talk 21:44, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Draft and article titles salted. Mjroots (talk) 11:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) "Can you plz help"[edit]  Priyanka9868 (talk) 11:20, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I HAVE TRIED SEVERAL TIME PUBLISHING CONTENT ON WIKIPEDIA BUT IT IS SHOWING PROMOTION CAN YOU PLZ HELP No need for capitals, Priyanka9868. Which article(s) or draft(s) are you asking about? -- Hoary (talk) 11:29, 22 November 2021 (UTC) This is the page Draft:Kapil Gupta — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868 (talk • contribs) 12:06, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Priyanka9868 Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about someone and their accomplishments. A Wikipedia article about a person must summarize what independent reliable sources with significant coverage have chosen on their own to say about a person, showing how they meet the special Wikipedia definition of a notable person. Most of the sources in the draft seem to be interviews with the person, or simple biographical descriptions, not in depth, significant coverage of the person. Please see Your First Article. 331dot (talk) 12:14, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I quote the deleted draft: The company comes under IT Software ,Data Analytics , AI and IOT industries. At the very outset, OMLogic is not an marketing outsourcing company, but a strategic partner for your online marketing success. They offer a holistic “one-stop-shopping” solution for the internet marketing needs of clients. Within that, what does "strategic" add to "partner", what does "holistic" add to "one-stop-shopping", and why the "your" in "your online marketing success"? And Priyanka9868, you say that you have tried to publish this; but you have not. Or anyway "Priyanka9868" has not. Are you saying that you, Alex2321 and Sattu.pandey are all the same person? -- Hoary (talk) 12:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Also, are you related to Priyanka9868146? --David Biddulph (talk) 13:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) User:Alex2321 created the logo for CHES Special Risk that Priyanka9868146 used in Draft:CHES Special Risk. David notMD (talk) 15:35, 22 November 2021 (UTC) No, we are not a same person. Actually he is one of my linkedin friend. I was not able to upload the logo of CHES Special Risk that why I have asked him to do so. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Priyanka9868146 (talk • contribs) 05:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Sandbox[edit] Hello is it possible to create an article if the first one you did has not yet been reviewed? how can I write on the sandbox if it only brings the draft I had done previously?Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Faith Buyaki (talk) 12:54, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, Faith Buyaki, it is possible. Just create and use a new sandbox. You can do this by for example clicking on User:Faith Buyaki/sandbox 2 and using that. A different name is possible; just be sure that the name starts User:Faith Buyaki/. -- Hoary (talk) 13:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Biology[edit] Biologyassignments write briefly holozoic nutrition, parasitic nutrition, feeding mechanism in holozoic organisms. 105.112.176.163 (talk) 14:53, 22 November 2021 (UTC) We're not doing your coursework for you, and nor will the reference desks. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:25, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Holozoic nutrition exists as an under-referenced, Stub article. David notMD (talk) 15:40, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Help moving my draft[edit] Hi, I have created a draft, Draft:Angel Heredia, that I think is ready for review. Angel Heredia is already a Wikipedia page, so could someone with the needed rights move the draft to Draft:Angel Heredia (soccer) before I submit it for review? Thank you in advance! 73.162.91.15 (talk) 16:33, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you submit your draft for review and it is accepted, the reviewer will place it at the proper title. You may wish to leave a note on the draft talk page explaining the titling issue, though. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I went ahead and moved the draft (per Wikipedia:Naming conventions (sportspeople)#Association football (soccer)) to make it easier on the reviewer. DanCherek (talk) 16:39, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Paw partol[edit] Can someone help with gross of paw patrol the movie as acorrding to box office mojo it at $130M[1] 92.236.253.249 (talk) 17:24, 22 November 2021 (UTC) References ^ https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt11832046/  Courtesy link: PAW_Patrol:_The_Movie RudolfRed (talk) 18:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC)  Done by Clpo13. GoingBatty (talk) 05:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reaching a consensus[edit] Hello, after many failures, I have explained why my edits should be accepted. Please share your opinion on these pages: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Marcelo_Claure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Ottobock Centrereded (talk) 17:41, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Centrereded. Your edits create the impression that your goal on Wikipedia is to make Marcelo Claure and Hans Georg Näder look bad. Cullen328 (talk) 18:17, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @Centrereded: Reaching a consensus on an article talk page is much more difficult if the text that's proposed is long and consists of many sections. It is very unlikely that you will get a consensus in favour of what essentially amounts to "please restore all my edits", especially since the text you proposed to add is not quite neutral in tone. You received some very good advice and explanations of how the process works here; please take some time to read that and start a discussion about which specific points you think should be added to the article. Well-sourced criticism of individuals and companies can certainly be included in Wikipedia articles, but it has to be added in a neutral manner, and considering what is due weight. --bonadea contributions talk 20:02, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I also have no interest in the topics, but did see many comments that proposed refernces were not considered Wikipedia reliable source, and a general sense of 'piling on' rather than neutral point of view and appropriate length. You have been hammering at these articles since at least July, with for example, an attack-toned draft Draft:Hans Georg Näder. Why this deep and persistent interest in a draft and an article about German and Bolivian businessmen, respectively? David notMD (talk) 21:05, 22 November 2021 (UTC) I would like to add people on Merseyside people Wikipedia page[edit]  ACtiling (talk) 19:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) @ACtiling, List of people from Merseyside? It's not locked or anything, you can edit it. Only add people that has a WP-article, preferably with a reference that supports that they belong on that page, see WP:TUTORIAL on how to add references. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:13, 22 November 2021 (UTC) WP:ADVENTURE can also be useful as an intro to Wikipedia. Gråbergs Gråa Sång (talk) 20:16, 22 November 2021 (UTC) You are on the verge of being blocked from making any edits to List of people from Merseyside. At the Administrators' Incidents board: "This is a newish editor, who is solely focussed on making changes to one article - List of people from Merseyside. They probably mean well. However, I have never before come across an editor who is so unable to listen to advice on basic editing skills - for example, they appear to believe that it's only possible to add a name to the list while removing one at the same time. They have been repeatedly advised, and occasionally warned, by several editors on numerous occasions, and directed to places like WP:Teahouse, but appear to be completely unable to comprehend what makes an edit allowable, and seem unwilling to learn. I would far prefer that they were not blocked but rather improve their skills - but sheer inability to achieve a modicum of competence appears to be an unresolvable problem. Any advice?" At issue, SPECIFICALLY, is that you are removing existing names for no valid reason, then inserting new names, but not consistent with the alphabetical order of the list. Stop removing names. Being a person from the past is not a valid reason to remove a name. Do not remove names. Stop removing names. REALLY. Or be blocked from ever editing this article again. David notMD (talk) 21:23, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Why i cant see my name on wikipedia??[edit] I have acted in a Bollywood movie as an lead actress, why i cant see myself on Wikipedia’s page 43.248.70.167 (talk) 22:07, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. If you meet the Wikipedia definition of a notable actress, you might merit an article, but it is strongly advised that you not attempt to write one yourself, see autobiography policy. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps[edit] Arbitrary merge to another page. Argonne was one of the only 13 founding corps of Drum Corps International in 1972. An editor (with no drum corps background) arbitrarily merged this page into a defunt D & B page. Argonne should hold it's own page because of it's historical significance. Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Argonne73 (talk) 22:08, 22 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Argonne73. Please stop edit warring: that is regarded as disruptive, and may get you blocked. We get that you believe that there should be a separate article about Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps; but several experienced editors have disagreed with you, and nobody (including you) has argued for its retention at WP:Articles for deletion/Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps. Wikipedia works by consensus: if you think a change should be made (or not be made) it is up to you to persuade other editors according to Wikipedia's policies. A core policy is notability: it is not enough for a subject to be "of historical significance" (or popular, important, famous, influential or several other characteristics which would contribute to notability out in the world): in Wikipedia we use the word in a special sense, which mostly comes down to "are there enough reliably published sources, wholly independent of the subject, and containing significant coverage of the subject, to base an article on?" Several editors have expressed their opinion that the existing article does not establish this. If you want the article retained it is up to you to persuade other editors that there are adequate sources to establish (which means, finding such sources) that it meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. --ColinFine (talk) 22:51, 22 November 2021 (UTC) pokemon showdown[edit] how do i find pokemon showdown ifo here DMPenguin (talk) 00:16, 23 November 2021 (UTC) DMPenguin (talk) there is one sentence about Pokémon Showdown in the "Fan community" section of the Pokémon article. If you are able to find good published references about Pokémon Showdown you can expand the article's coverage on that topic. Karenthewriter (talk) 00:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi DMPenguin! there's also a small section on rules used by smogon, the community(?) that hosts pokémon showdown over at Pokémon_competitive_play#Smogon if you want to check that or help over there. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:56, 23 November 2021 (UTC) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath[edit] Hi there - can someone help me with my inline citations / footnotes? I am putting up my first wiki page submission and have feedback to improve this area - but unsure what else i need to do to meet criteria. Feedback on my new page appreciated: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draft:Seizure_Rescue_Breath Claire Leaf (talk) 03:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Three points. First, an index number ("<ref> ... </ref>") comes immediately after a comma, period, etc; not before it. Secondly, you can (and most drafts should) reuse references: ("<ref name="XYZ">full details</ref>" for the first instance, "<ref name="XYZ" />" for each subsequent instance, where "XYZ" is something distinctive). Thirdly, for any reference, you format a link something like this Author, "[https://www.example.com/blah.blahblah/blah.html Title of the web page]", Website, date. Retrieved date. -- Hoary (talk) 03:14, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Claire Leaf. Please read Referencing for beginners. There are many techniques for creating useful references. What they all have in common is that uninformative bare URLs are not displayed, but instead text based references are displayed, which include all of the relevant bibliographic details of the reference. Things like title, author, publication or publisher, date of publication, page numbers, ISBN numbers for books, and the like. Cullen328 (talk) 03:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I fixed some of the references, but in doing so, discovered that the draft as submitted is a close paraphrasing of reference #2: https://leafie.org/seizurerescuebreath/. Reword, so that the text is in your own word rather than sentences verbatim. As for the refs I did not fix, the above link shows how to convert URLs to valid refs. There remains one other problem that may b insurmountable. Wikipedia requires that for health articles, refs meet criteria described at WP:MEDRS. The refs you have do not appear to be sufficient, i.e., not review articles of multiple clinical trials. David notMD (talk) 03:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I need someone to check 1. Draft:Gehad Hamdy 2. Draft:Speak Up ?????/? to tell me if I should add or edit anything please. Appreciated ?[edit]  Ayaelmelegy (talk) 04:06, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Ayaelmelegy, I took a quick look at the first of these. It has 13 references, but there's no indication of which of the 13 is a reference for which part of the draft. Additionally, each of the 13 is just a "bare URL". Please see the section immediately above for how to improve the references. -- Hoary (talk) 04:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Second one, drafts also URLs. David notMD (talk) 05:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) A Request to add Template to talk page[edit] As a new Wikipedia user, I always wondered how to add Template like example NoACEMM to a User talk. Moreno Ardan1 (talk) 3:18, 23 November 2021 FYI?– Removed duplicate signature As the message on your talk page suggests, you can just add {{NoACEMM}} to your own talk page. Templates usually belong to the top of talk pages. ClaudineChionh (talk – contribs) 09:25, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is Imslp a good source to back up my information?[edit] Ok so I want to edit Dolores Paterno because it says there that the original lyrics were in Spanish and translated by Levi Celerio which is not true because the original sheet music from 1880 already had Tagalog lyrics and Levi Celerio added another version of lyrics.(since the original song was published before Levi was born) I don't know other sources but the sheet music in Imslp.com that explains this. Isangtaosamundo (talk) 08:28, 23 November 2021 (UTC) In your place, I'd (i) add {{Dubious|date=November 2021}} immediately after the sentence The lyrics were translated from Spanish into Tagalog by the Filipino National Artist Levi Celerio; and (ii) raise the matter on Talk:Dolores Paterno. In the latter, give your reasons for saying that it's not true. I'm unfamiliar with imslp.com; in its current state, I have to say that it looks like mere junk. Can you perhaps retrieve an earlier, reliable version from the Wayback Machine? If so, give the title and URL of the relevant page. Feel free to cite other reliable sources (books, journals) even if they haven't been reproduced on the web and aren't downloadable. -- Hoary (talk) 10:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Vandalism[edit] Hi, I wanted to know the precise difference between blatant and subtle vandalism. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:34, 23 November 2021 (UTC) hi Itcouldbepossible! basically subtle vandalism is vandalism where there is an attempt to make it seem real or otherwise hide it from others, for example changing a date to "21 April" which may seem real until further inspection instead of something obviously fake such as "420 January" such as the case with blatant vandalism. other such cases are, from the page linked, are adding plausible misinformation to articles (such as minor alteration of facts or additions of plausible-sounding hoaxes), hiding vandalism (such as by making two bad edits and reverting only one), simultaneously using multiple accounts or IP addresses to vandalize, abuse of maintenance and deletion templates, or reverting legitimate edits with the intent of hindering the improvement of pages. happy editing!  melecie  t - 09:48, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks a bunch @Melecie. But still I want some help. Can you tell me what type of vandalism the two edits are in page Warfaze, which I reverted moments back. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) it may be one of those edits that fall in between, like if you understand bengali it would probably be visible that it's an attempt at vandalism, while if you don't it could be understood as an attempt to add something constructively to a page.  melecie  t - 10:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Yeah so the language matters. Any way that you @Melecie. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Archives vanished[edit] I went to my own Talk to archive discussions, only to see that my previously created archives have vanished. Any idea what happened? David notMD (talk) 11:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Nevermind. Tracked it down to a self-inflicted deletion of "Talk header"" months ago. David notMD (talk) 11:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Heading correction[edit] How do i correct a spelling on the heading? i added an unwanted letter on the heading and need to remove it . How do i do it.  11:19, 23 November 2021 (UTC) — Preceding unsigned comment added by ChabbieCee (talk • contribs) ChabbieCee, you edit a regular heading (such as "Heading correction" for this thread) just as you edit other text. As for the titles of articles or other pages, you need to "move" a page to its new title. So if you realize that the name you want for Ms Nerwande is Elisabeth (with an "s"), you view the page User:ChabbieCee/Elizabeth Nerwande, click on the option to move it, specify User:ChabbieCee/Elisabeth Nerwande, give your reason for the move, and say (i) yes you want to move any talk page there may be (if there's no talk page, no matter), and (ii) yes there should be a redirect from the old name to the new one. -- Hoary (talk) 11:42, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Is it concern if draft doesn't show up in search?[edit] I created a draft about a dance collective called FlucT Draft:FlucT. When I do a search for "fluct" on Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?search=fluct&title=Special%3ASearch&go=Go&ns0=1, the draft doesn't show up. This concerns me because I fear someone else may start an article on FlucT not realizing there is already a draft. Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen (talk) 11:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Greg Dahlen To search for a draft, you must put "Draft:" in front of the draft title. Keep in mind that users are not under any obligation to first search for a draft if they want to directly create an article. I have added the submission template to your draft so you can submit it. 331dot (talk) 11:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) 331dot thanks, I probably understood that. I just wonder if it's a good policy, because some editors may not know they have to put draft: in front, miss my draft, create their own draft, then there seems to be a duplication of effort that feels needless? Greg Dahlen (talk) 13:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi, Greg Dahlen, and welcome to the Teahouse. You can always open a discussion on this sort of issue at the Village pump. But in my view there are good reasons for the way it is. The Wikipedia that the public sees is six million encyclopaedia articles: nothing else. That's all that is indexed by external search engines, and that's all that the Wikipedia search box gives you unless you tell it otherwise. All the rest - talk pages, drafts, user pages, projects pages, policies, essays, etc, are "under the bonnet", seen only by those who choose to look inside. --ColinFine (talk) 13:59, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Greg Dahlen: There is actually a clever feature which makes it unlikely anyone would accidentally start a second draft with exactly the same name as one that already exists. If you go through all the steps to begin a new article called "FlucT" by typing that in the search box, choosing the option to "Search for pages containing FlucT" and then clicking on the red link in the search output page where it says "You may create the page "FlucT", but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered." you'll find that the newly created page will have a big banner at the top saying "There is a draft for this article at Draft:FlucT." You can confirm this by clicking on the redlink I placed in this answer, which cuts out all the searching and will now go straight into draft creation mode when clicked. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:18, 24 November 2021 (UTC) how do i seen how many edits i have[edit] how do i see how many edits i have thanks DMPenguin (talk) 13:05, 23 November 2021 (UTC) By clicking this link. -- Hoary (talk) 13:23, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hi DMPenguin. Just in case you're wondering where the link that Hoary mentioned above can be found, just go to your user page in in the left-hand sidebar click on "User contributions" in the "Tools" section. Then, scroll all the way down to the very bottom of the page and click on "Edit count". That's where you'll find the aforementioned link. -- Marchjuly (talk) 13:30, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I go to the little toolbar (Talk, Sandbox, Preferences, Beta, Watchlist, Contributions, Log out) that's to the left of my username, which is above any Wikipedia article I'm viewing when logged in. I click on Preferences and my number of edits is shown. That's what I see on an aging Mac laptop, when using Safari as a browser, but you may see something different on your computer. Karenthewriter (talk) 17:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) English[edit] What is a tea house? 41.114.234.36 (talk) 13:32, 23 November 2021 (UTC) On Wikipedia it is a friendly place where you can ask questions to get help with using and editing Wikipedia. Theroadislong (talk) 13:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Science[edit] How do you make a tealeaf 41.190.245.5 (talk) 13:36, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, and welcome to the Teahouse. This is intended to be a friendly place for getting help in using and editing Wikipedia: for general knowledge questions, the reference desk is a better place; or often, you can look at one of our six million articles, such as tea processing. --ColinFine (talk) 14:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Bold, Italics, or Quotes?[edit] I'm writing my first ever article from scratch, albeit I've written essays for practically empty existing articles many times before, so I know what I'm doing. One thing I'm never sure about however, is when to use bold, italics and "quotations." Although I know that "quotations" are used on songs. I'm at one of those situations now, while writing about some early appearances of a former footballer turned rapper. I'm mentioning and referencing a few of the Youtube channel's he appeared on, but as they don't have Wikipedia articles like SB.TV, Mixtape Madness, Link Up TV and GRM Daily do, I'm wondering whether I should put the channel names in bold, italics or "quotations"? Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Danstarr69 (talk) 14:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Can I have an answer please? Danstarr69 (talk) 21:13, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Sorry you didn't get a reply until now. I guess all our volunteers were busy! We have a 'Manual of Style' which should help you (see WP:MOS), or visit WP:BOLD; WP:ITALICS and WP:QUOTATIONS for detailed guidance. Avoid using bold in articles anywhere except the first sentence to highlight the subject, and possible later on the first use of another term that is synonymous with the page title. Bold should definitely not be used to highlight YouTueb channel names or anything else. Use italics sparingly, for things like scientific names, and use quotation marks only when you actually quote something a person genuinely said (quote it verbatim), followed by a citation to prove that they said it in that exact form. Don't make quotations very large chunks of text, and don't insert song lyrics which will probably be copyright and be instantly removed. Does that answer you now? Nick Moyes (talk) 22:53, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I'm not sure. I've just had a quick look at the articles and the Style Manual seems to help a bit. However the Be Bold article you linked doesn't seem to mention anything about when to use Bold text. And the Italics and "Quotations" articles don't look much use either, especially as the "quotations" thing isn't what I was talking about. When you mention a song, you put the song title in quotation marks like this "Song". Basically what I'm saying is... Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a website/Youtube channel which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a film/TV show which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a music mixtape/EP/LP/album which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention relevant business which doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention an award ceremony and its categories which don't have a Wikipedia article? Should I use bold, italics or quotation marks when I mention a person who doesn't have a Wikipedia article? Etc etc. Here's an example paragraph, with some of the things mentioned: John Smith collaborated with Jim Smith on the song "Wikipedia is Great." The music video for "Wikipedia is Great" was released on the Youtube channel Wikipedia TV. He then released his album titled Wikipedia: Greatest Hits which won a Wikipedia Award for Best Album. The Wikipedia Awards were broadcast on BBC One. Danstarr69 (talk) 23:41, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Danstarr69 Very recently I learned about MOS:TITLEABSENTBOLD and would recommend not worrying too much about the infinite rules. I'll admit I don't have an ironclad rule for italics/quotations, but whatever decision you go with, consistency within the same article is key. Sometimes certain topics have their own writing guidelines/styles tied to a specific region/grammar set. Generally bold text guidelines are defined in MOS:BOLD, not to be confused with the philosophy of WP:BOLD EDITING. Someone else will help you if need be. Thank you for the question and happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:55, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Shushugah Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Text formatting#Italic type From reading the Italics bit in the above link, it basically looks like I should use Italics whenever I want to emphasise something in the middle of a sentence, unless it's a song of course, as I already know that those are highlighted with "quotation marks." Danstarr69 (talk) 00:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Indeed! A fourth scenario that wasn't mentioned. Whether a tangentially related Article exists or doesn't exist, has no impact on whether it should be boldened/italicized or quoted. You may decide depending on its usefulness make a WP:BLUELINK for existing articles, and a WP:REDLINK for non existing articles that have strong potential to become one. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 00:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Visual Editing[edit] Hi, can anybody out here tell me how I can visually edit a table, as in this page. I could figure out how I can add a new row below a specific row, but could not figure out how to change the sl. no of all the following rows, after adding a new row. I could now answer the edit request on that talk page, not only because I could not do it, but because the edit request had not provided relevant details. Anyway, can anyone please tell me the procedure of doing it. For example, consider the following. I want to add a new row after 7th row. And add new details. So what is the procedure, using visual editing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:18, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible It's a two step process, involving both Visual Editor and Source Editor. I have copied the source code from the article into my Sandbox as it's too risky playing around with tables directly - and especially as this is just a demo. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 (Note that my edit summary links to the source page where the authors are credited - do this even in your sandbox please, as we need to credit other people's work when we upload it, as it isn't really ours to claim as our own) You'll see I have added my very own, well-known and highly-popular YouTube Channel to a newly inserted row at position 8. You should do that bit most easily in Visual Editor by Selecting Row 7, clicking the Chevron button that appears on the far left of the table and selecting Insert below. Now type in all the information/data that you can, obviously numbering this as Row 8. Ignore the fact that text is not aligned, you'll fix that in the next step. Now save your edits (Publish Changes) then go back in, but via Edit Source so that you're editing the wikimarkup.Do not use VE. Find the row with the newly added data. (Tip: use Ctrl-F to search for my surname, so you're taken straight there.) Find the line containing the position number '8' that you added. It will look likethis: |8 Copy and paste the style command from an existing centred cell and paste it in so it looks like this: | style="text-align:center" |8 Preview it to check it's centred, and repeat elsewhere as necessary. For flags and so forth, find an exisiting row contining what you need and paste that in to the empty cell (also within Source Editor, not in VE) Finally, you will now have to manually edit every subsequent row so that the row number shifts up one to accommodate the newly-inserted row. (You cannot do this automatically as you might using Excel.) It should take you just a few minutes to fix this. I stopped at fixing this at row 20, which is why there are two rows numbered 20 in my demo. Again, don't use VE for this step. Please visit this Help page to appreciate what you can do in Visual Editor and all its limitations. You can't, for example, change colours with VE - you must use source editor. The 1st line of that section I linked to mentions a 'Phabricator' list of tasks to improve VE. Follow it to appreciate what can and can't yet be done. See https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T108245 Whilst you might be frustrated that you can't do everything in Visual Editor, just remember that this tool was devised to make basic editing simpler and more WYSIWYG for beginners. Experienced editors generally tend to avoid Visual Editor and prefer using Source Editor. You are now asking about very complex editing, where either only Source Editor or a combination of both editing tools will be necessary. I hope this all makes sense. Please ping me know when you've done with the stuff in my Sandbox, and I'll then delete the content from it. Nick Moyes (talk) 16:49, 23 November 2021 (UTC) PS: Another little tip for you: Enter as much data as you can in VE. If you can't add what you want, leave some placeholder text like aaaa bbbb ccccc etc in its place. This make it much, much easier to find the right cell to edit late in Source Editor/wikimarkup. Cheers, Nick Moyes (talk) 16:54, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes I really don't have words to thank you man. You just helped me beyond imagination. I really did not imagine, you would use your precious time in writing so much for me. I read this page. But could not find any help. But see, you gave me the the necessary page, which has the right information. But I could not find it myself - so foolish. I just sometimes tend to wonder, how some Wikipedians, know about every help page in Wikipedia, and have explored every nook and corner of Wikipedia. They know the exact help pages, for the exact problem, and they know which help page has that needed information. For example see, the page that I was looking into, and the page that you gave me. Such a difference. I thought I might get help from the Visual Editor help page, but you gave me the actual page which has the information that I need, the Help:Table page, under the VE section. Although both the pages may seem to have the same kind of information, but it is a huge difference. And see you also left me a PS: and gave me your great tip. Yes, in that way, it is really easy to find out. Thank you again for helping me learn Wikipedia, and with all the elder Wikipedians' kind help, I am learning so fast. Thanks again. Have a nice Wikipedia career. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes But I cannot figure out one thing, while writing the name of the channel I wrote Itcouldbepossible, but wikipedia is thinking it to be a page, and in the preview section, I see that it is writing like [1], which it thinks to be a link, for further reference you can see that in your sandbox. While yours is not looking like mine. Can you figure out and tell me what is wrong with me. I am always getting confused. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 05:03, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible The only think "wrong with you" is your wonderful fascination in some of the minutae of Wikipedia. Nerdiness is an asset here, as is a desire to ask questions and to learn. I only hope you then put what you're learning into practice. That's why I was willing to spend time answering someone's technical questions (even though I'm no expert on tables at all - or indeed much else, if I think about it!) The best way to learn from one's errors is first to accept that one must have made a mistake, and then to keep analysing the problem until you suddenly go ahah! that's my mistake. You never forget those types of mistakes, and that's how we learn through life. Although not normally encouraged, I give you permission to go into that section of my sandbox and make an edit there to show me the problem you're encountering. I'm not 100% sure what you're seeing. My link was actually a wikilink to the Teahouse, modified to display my name. (In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity, but might not on yours. A red link is to a page that doesn't exist, whether it's an article page, a user page or something else. The link you've just pasted above was to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/En.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible If you had put it as an external link (using one square bracket), it would look like this: [2] Both would not work becaue you accidentally repeated the en.wikipedia.org elements. You actually needed https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Itcouldbepossible as an external link, though that would not be appropriate for a table. This also works: Itcouldbepossible - I forced the User: bit to not display by putting a vertical pipe character at the end. Now I think you asked somewhere else about how we learn all this stuff. Watching, reading, doing and making mistakes. It's taken me 10 years of editing to pick up the stuff I'm now happy to share with you, but I was quite able to do most of the basic editing (apart from tables - they're really scary!) after quite a short time. I worry a bit that you're wanting to "run before you can walk", but I hope I've now managed to answer all your various questions. Good luck! Nick Moyes (talk) 11:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes, you are answering all my questions to my content. And you were saying about putting into use what I am learning. Yes, I am doing that. For example when I copied the table from your sandbox to my new tables sandbox, I wrote from whom I have copied the table. What I am wanting to say is that for example I want a wiki link to my talk page, which would show up like "Itcouldbepossible", using the vertical pipe (|) character. Then why cannot I do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 12:28, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very simple. [[User talk:Itcouldbepossible|Itcouldbepossible]] renders as Itcouldbepossible. For help on wikilinks, see Help:Wikilinks. --David Biddulph (talk) 12:38, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks, that was what I was wanting to do from the beginning. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible If you edit the source to this thread and look at my reply above, you should see exactly how I did it. The alternative is still to use the vertical pipe after your username, but to add different text (either your own name without the User: bit) or as I did when linking you to Albert Einstein! You'll work it out. Nick Moyes (talk) 12:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thank you, I wanted to tell you this from the very beginning. But you could not understand it, anyway, thank you for all the other help that you provided. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Also I want to know how I can turn by wiki redirects to green as you said here - In my settings it shows up as a green WP:REDIRECT for clarity Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:26, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Is it possible to mask external links to read the way I want. I mean Wiki links can be renamed as the editor wishes, is there any way in which external links can be masked, or is it at all possible? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating a page ethically[edit] Creating a page for my boss My boss is adamant that she wants a Wikipedia account (she's a prominent science communication researcher). I think she probably deserves one, but I'm also deeply aware that I'm biased as a prospective page author. Does anyone have any advice for me? I want to make my boss happy, but not by violating Wikipedia guidelines. Lorikie (talk) 14:26, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: You'll need to read and abide by Wikipedia:Conflict of interest. DuncanHill (talk) 14:33, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Lorikie, and welcome to the Teahouse. Thank you for being up-front about your situation. Unfortunately, there are some formidable obstacles in the way of you being able to satisfy your boss. As Duncan says, you need to read up about conflict of interest, and further, you need to make the formal declarations that you are a paid editor (it doesn't matter if you are specifically paid to do this, from what you say it is part of your job). Next, you need to drop the idea of "deserving a page", because that assumes that a Wikipedia article is in any way for the benefit of its subject. Of course many people (and other entities) do get some benefit frrom there being a Wikipedia article about them, but that is incidental: Wikipedia has no such purpose, and indeed is indifferent as to whether the subject wants an article about them or does not want an article about them. An article about your boss will not belong to her, will not be under her control, will not necessarily say what she wants it to say, and should be based almost entirely on what people wholly unconnected with her have chosen to publish about her (good or bad!) and not on what she or her associates say or want to say. You might like to show her an article about yourself isn't necessarily a good thing. The counterpart of "deserve" that Wikipedia actually uses is, "does the subject meet Wikipedia's criteria for notability? This is not directly related to prominence, importance, influence, popularity, or any of the other things that you might normally connect with "notability": in essence it is a question of whether there are enough reliably published sources, wholly unconnected with the subject to base an article on. If you and she decide that you still want there to be an article, there are more hurdles. Creating a new article is much more difficult than it looks - I liken it to building a house as your first building project, or playing a public recital after your first violin lesson, and always advise new editors to put the idea aside for at least six months while they "learn the trade" and how Wikipedia works. Editors who do not heed this advice often have a frustrating time as they put in a lot of work and don't understand why their house keeps falling down. Having a conflict of interest you will likely find it even harder, as you will need to basically forget everything you know about your boss, and summarise only what those independent commentators have published. If you decide to go ahead, you need to read your first article, and then use the articles for creation process to create a draft. --ColinFine (talk) 14:57, 23 November 2021 (UTC) If pressed to proceed by your boss, see if there are three or more published articles about her - content at length, not just a name-mention - and then use guidance at Help:Referencing for beginners to create references in proper ref format in your Sandbox. If you cannot find publications about her, then the effort is futile. David notMD (talk) 15:52, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Lorikie: Is your boss by any chance Laura Lindenfield? If so, I think that you will have a very difficult time finding the sources you'll need for a draft article on a living person in which each and every statement has to have a reliable reference. When I Google her name, I get a number of sources but they are virtually all based on interviews (or are on websites clearly linked to her), so are not WP:INDEPENDENT. The nearest I can find that might be OK is this one at science.org which probably reaches the WP:SIGCOV for notability (specifically in her case WP:NACADEMIC) but still seems, by using language like "She is passionate about...", to take a tone that Wikipedia would not use (see WP:NPOV). Your best bet, I think, is to draft a very short article using such independent sources and then not be too disappointed if the Draft is declined: that will at least prove you have tried! Make sure you start by complying with the mandatory disclosures described at WP:PAID. Mike Turnbull (talk) 15:00, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Text Allignment[edit] Any idea on text alignment in table. I want to center align some text in tables, using visual editor. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:44, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible I think you'd probably need to use wikisource code for that, using the "text-align:center; parameter. PS: I've tweaked the demo warning you placed on your sandbox page as you'd left the nowiki commands in which stop it from working. So the warning now looks like it's come from me, but obviously isn't a real vandalism warning. The best way to leave warnings is to enable WP:TWINKLE in your Preferences. Then it does it automatically for you via menu options, plus a whole lot more. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes thanks for the edit. I know it is not a real vandalism warning. It is just my sandbox. If I had done something wrong, then you would have told me in the talk page. But anyway to get to the point, I have already TWINKLE enabled. I used it to start delete discussions, and got myself blocked for being thought to be a sockpuppet, since that page was created by another sock, and the sock with whom the checkusers thought me to be linked had edit warred with the previous sock. Anyway thats not the point. What you are saying is that it will give me warnings. Can you specify what warning, or what type of warnings??? Also it would be really kind of you, if you could tell me in a more precise way of how to use wikisource code, suddenly while I am writing in normal language. For example I am using "text-align:center" here, but nothing is happening. Please tell me the way, to center text in a table while using visual or source editor. Thanks for the answer, and regards. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible As I replied to you on my sandbox, it's important that you are editing tables and complex entries in WP:Source Editor not Visual Editor. Did you follow my instructions on how to switch between them, and did it work? You will get nowhere with anything other than the simplest of tables if you stick to VE. The parameter I mentioned above is wiki markup - as written with Source Editor. So, go to the table I put in my sandbox for you at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Nick_Moyes/sandbox#Scratch_5 Click 'Edit Source' next to the heading to open the section in Source Editor. (Tell me if that function is not showing, as it means you've not forced it to display via your personal Preferences setting. My default is for it to offer me both editing tools all the time - it should be yours, too, especially if you're working on tables.) Search for the word 'center' and you'll see 101 examples - one controlling each cell of data. Regarding WP:TWINKLE: Go to your own userpage. Use the drop down menu box marked 'TW' to access the Twinkle menu. The first sub-item is WARN. This opens a menu box for you to explore the various options. Try leaving yourself a first level warning against vandalism, then a second, and then a third. I can't explain all the options here for you - we expect editors to very carefully' learn for themselves how to use these powerful tools (which can easily upset other users). So read the TWINKLE page and the accompanying Documentation to understand what it can do. But it covers most of the common issues of edit waring, content removal, addition of uncited content, harassment, conflict of interest, spamming, plus single issue notices like encouragement to use edit summaries, biting newcomers, etc etc. There is a complete list of warning templates (here). Nick Moyes (talk) 10:33, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Yes the edit source function is showing. Also I thought that you were telling me of editing error warnings, so I asked what type of warnings. I had pasted that warning in my sandbox just to see how it looks. I knew how to use twinkle. For the table related thing, I want to know where should I place "text-align:center; parameter? I have made my edit on your sandbox. You can see that, and tell me if it is right or wrong. You will see that the table I created, it has some errors. For the channel name column I thought of adding my talk page and then renaming the wiki link as "Itcouldbepossible". But it showed up like this: ([3]) - why??? While your wiki link it redirects it to the teahouse it shows Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel? How come??? Why cannot I edit my wiki link to show my username, while on clicking it redirects to my talk page. For example yours show Nick Moyes' Wikipedia Editing Channel and it redirects to WP:TH Why is mine not like that?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 11:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wiki Tables[edit] Today I was editing random articles, when I came across Nach Baliye. I was reading the article, trying to find for any errors, when I came across this table [4]. I just sort of went mad seeing this table. Just a well formatted and advanced table, with all the color schemes, and just nice cell merging. Can anyone, for heaven's sake tell me how that table was created with all those attractive features. I don't really think that the Wiki markup was typed out. There must be some modern graphical interface, for doing such a tedious thing. I want to know how that table was created. I would really be glad, if I get the answer from someone who is an expert in this matter, and has been editing Wikipedia for a couple of years, because, I want the exact and precise method of creating such a table. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:58, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I've been editing for over 10 years and wouldn't dare to create such a thing. I have, however, created very long data tables by starting in Excel, getting all the sorting, the text and the wikilinks and in the right places before exporting it with a tool to Wikimarkup. But I'm not aware of a tool to make tables look pretty like that - so I shall await for answers from other users more experienced in such things, too. Nick Moyes (talk) 15:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: It takes work, often over time with improvements by different editors, often starting with copying the format from another page. The first similar table in the article was added by an IP here with edit summary "added table like other shows Jhalak". That may refer to Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart or an earlier season. It could maybe be tracked further back but I haven't tried. Help:Table has general help but it's complicated. Much of it is the same or similar as HTML tables which some editors already know. PrimeHunter (talk) 16:50, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @PrimeHunter Yes, but how did that specific table appear in Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa (season 9)#Scoring Chart. How was it created??? And also I wanted to know one thing, how on Earth did you find that specific page history, when the table was added?? I have seen many people doing so. Is their anyway of finding out when a specific edit was first made, and the what edits followed?? I really don't think that you flicked through the page history. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:14, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible There are various ways to find when an edit was first made. The slow way is to look at 500 edits in View History at a time. Let's assume that covers the entire history (if not, just increase the number to 5000 in the url bar), then you can find a rough midway point, click (and note down) the date you clicked. Is the edit showing there? IF yes, go down and divide the lower half of edits into half again, and select another date to click. Is the edit there? If 'No', then it will have been made between those two date points. Divide the edits roughly in half again and then again until you find the first one where that edit was made. Doing this in conjunction with looking at View History (green numbers are positive count of bytes added/red are negative overall additions) makes this just a few minutes work. It took me just a few moments to do that for Nach Baliye, speeded up by using Ctrl-F to search for 'Scoring Chart', of which there were 823 mentions in the edit summaries. I went to the lowest one, then scrolled down a dozen or so edits further and found a massive addition by an IP on 9 March 2019 with a very helpful edit summary. Job done. Of course, that's the slow way. For simplest way to find when a short text string was first added to an article is to copy it, then go to the View History tab. Just above all the row entries, click Find addition/removal to use the 'WikiBlame' tool. Be aware that by default it only searches 500 of the latest edits before the date selected. So it will miss the first addition of text if it's a very heavily edited page as this one is unless you spend time to understand how to take advantage of the tool's searching features. I wouldn't use it to search for a chart being added, but I might focus on just one unique element or keyword in that chart. Hope this helps. Nick Moyes (talk) 10:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks, I learnt a new thing. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 10:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Nick Moyes Thanks for the answer. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 04:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Prime Healthcare[edit] My interest in CAlifornia health systems drew me to Prime Healthcare, where I was struck by the difference in how Wiki editors handle the material. Whereas large systems such as Sutter and Kaiser are given the opportunity to list history, background, hospital names, etc, Prime's editing history is aggressive and heavy handed. The result is a page listing controversy and nothing else. Prime owns 45 hospitals nationwide, employs 50000 people, but you wouldn't know it by Wiki. BTW I am in no way affiliated or compensated by Prime; my research is for a graduate program. I'm just amazed at the discrepancy and poor treatment. I haven't researched it enough to determine whether sources should be improved on deleted materials, but that is different than what edit history shows. Any attempts to improve the page are immediately deleted wholesale, in apparent violation of Wiki editing rules. (I attempted to undo some edits myself) Can anyone explain this? Prime owner Prem Reddy has made a number of enemies with his handling of labor, etc. Is that at play here? Archie515 (talk) 16:46, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Courtesy link: Prime Healthcare Services Karenthewriter (talk) 17:20, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello @Archie515. Welcome to the Teahouse! You can discuss the issue about the content of the article on the article's talk page. The concerned editors might engage in the conversation and help you in finding a possible solution. Lightbluerain? (Talk | contribs) 17:24, 23 November 2021 (UTC) thanks but page monitors refuse to allow access and have not responded to talk page requests in the past. Now locked out from making any changes to sources. Page is an embarrassment to all Wiki contributors. Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC)Archie515Archie515 (talk) 22:29, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The Controversy section is well supported by reliable published sources. It's Prime Healthcare that should be embarrassed. Maproom (talk) 23:04, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Archie515: I see you posted twice at Talk:Prime Healthcare Services. The last piece of advice you were given there was to make a specific request. I suggest you think about the worst problem with the article, and then post a specific detailed suggestion on the talk page, such as: Please change the current article text "_____________" to "_____________" based on the independent reliable source found at ___________________. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Disambiguation-links tag on redirects[edit] In this edit I intentionally changed a redirect from targeting an article to targeting a disambiguation page. To my surprise, the "adding disambiguation links" tag was added. In a way, it makes sense (I added a link to a disambiguation page), but on the other hand, the tag is probably meant for when someone adds a link in an article without knowing it's a disambiguation page, like if I added a link to Georgia or Mercury in an article. Can something be changed so that this tagging isn't activated when the end result of the edit is a redirect? I reported this at WP:EF/FP but was sent here for a reason I don't understand: the responding editor said both that the tag isn't activated and that it's working properly. 72.77.45.188 (talk) 17:15, 23 November 2021 (UTC) The edit filter (which interdicts edits) is separate from the tagging system (which describes what an edit is). —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 17:38, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Do anyone think like that?[edit] Are there people actually thinking that this page represents a universal and unbiased point of view? Owerthise (talk) 18:00, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I think like that. It doesn't seem biased to me. What direction do you think it's biased in? Maproom (talk) 18:43, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I don't think there is such a thing as an universal point of view, certainly not about a topic connected to religion. It looks neutral to me; it may not be perfect (no article is) but there are no obvious problems. --bonadea contributions talk 19:02, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Owerthise: Welcome to the Teahouse! If you have a specific suggestion to improve the article, please post it on Talk:Muhammad with a reliable source and the {{edit extended-protected}} template, and another editor will review your request. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Help with revision[edit] Hello! I'm trying to revise the first two paragraphs of the Cultural context section of Cueva de las Manos and I need help with it. I've already put in a copy edit request for the whole page with the Guild of Copyeditors, but I was wondering if there was a group/person willing to help with this particular section in the meantime. I'm trying to revise the section in accordance with the following advice of FunkMonk in the talk page: There is some repetition in how you describe the paintings were returned to and were influential for the people throughout many thousands of years, perhaps check if someone of it can be consolidated or made less similar. If anyone would be willing to lend a hand in this respect it would be much appreciated. If there is a better place to ask for such help, I would be grateful if someone could point me there. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Best, Tyrone Madera (talk) 18:01, 23 November 2021 (UTC) This might be better for the Talk Page, but one possible way to consolidate this might be to write this instead, which combines two separate statements: However, that so many people contributed to the artwork for thousands of years suggests the cave held great significance for the artists, with earlier groups influencing later ones through a continuous narrative, playing out over millennia. But that's just one possibility. Pyrrho the Skeptic (talk) 18:51, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing this Ayaelmelegy (talk) 22:03, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Ayaelmelegy, and welcome to the Teahouse. I'm afraid there is quite a lot you need to do before that draft is publishable. The things that caught my attention are: Remove all the links to interviews. There are restrictions on the use of External links in articles, and in any case Wikipedia is not interested in what the subject of an article says or wants to say about themselves, or what their associates say about them. Wikipedia is only interested in what people who have no connection with the subject, and who have not been prompted or fed information on behalf of the subject, have chosen to publish about the subject in reliable sources. Format all the references so that a reviewer can readily evaluate which of them are likely to be most reliable and independent. See REFB, and WP:NONENG. With you anonymous URLs it is hard to see whether your draft establishes that she meets Wikipedia's criteria for notability. Remove all the evaluative language. No article should ever describe anything in Wikipedia's voice as "one of the most important" or "much needed". I get that you strongly approve of Hamdy's work, but none of that must come out in the article: it must be a neutral summary of what the independent sources say about her - and if there is criticism, then you should probably summarise that too. (You can quote a source that described something as "important" or "much needed" but you need to make sure that it is a source which is wholly unconnected with the subject). Please also see WP:NOTSOAPBOX. --ColinFine (talk) 23:12, 23 November 2021 (UTC) I did some edits would you please check them? Thank you — Preceding unsigned comment added by Ayaelmelegy (talk • contribs) 00:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) new wikipedia page[edit]  2600:1700:9C80:62E0:89ED:2A1E:FE48:ACD3 (talk) 22:08, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Hello and welcome. If you want to create a new article(not a page), that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content. If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Unregistered users(as well as new accounts) cannot directly create new articles. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 23 November 2021 (UTC) What do you do on this page[edit]  Jenay Ava (talk) 22:27, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @Jenay Ava Welcome to the Teahouse. What we do is welcome new users and assist them with any problems they may encounter whilst editing Wikipedia. We recognise that it can be a steep learning curve to begin with, so we try to make that journey a little smoother for you in the hope that you will stick around and become one of our many regular contributors. Unfortunately, looking at your very first few contributions, I fear you think Wikipedia talk pages might be like a chat forum. They are not, and all we do here is help build the worlds greatest online encyclopaedia, and use the talk pages to assist us in that task. You'd be most welcome to help with this undertaking (6.2 million+ article in English so far), but this place is not a social media chat site. Sorry. Nick Moyes (talk) 22:40, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Help writing a page[edit] I have the page written and now need to post to wikipedia, I have akk the references. Please help, FletcherEmma (talk) 23:37, 23 November 2021 (UTC) @FletcherEmma welcome to Tea House!. If you want to create a new article, that is one of the hardest things to do here. We usually recommend that you first edit existing articles in areas that interest you, to get a feel for how Wikipedia operates and what is expected of article content.If you still want to attempt to create a new article now, please read Your First Article and go to Articles for Creation to create and submit a draft. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:47, 23 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Gehad Hamdy[edit] Hey. I have been editing the errors on Draft:Gehad Hamdy for while. Is there anything I should or edit before publishing? Thank you. Ayaelmelegy (talk) 00:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Yes, some things need to be improved: (1) the article must have a lead portion (the introduction should not have a heading), (2) there should not be no links or Arabic letters in section headings, (3) there is too much text in the infobox, and Arabic text isn't needed there. There are other things, but you can start with this. Regards. — Alalch Emis (talk) 00:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) STATUS: Draft nominated for Speedy deletion and creating editor blocked as suspected sock (denies). David notMD (talk) 01:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have overhauled (Major Cleanup) the article (This specifically). Jairus is doing... ?? 02:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ayaelmelegy: Draft:Gehad Hamdy has no references in the "Biography" and "Speak Up" sections. Please add more independent reliable sources to your draft before submitting for AfC. Thanks! GoingBatty (talk) 06:34, 24 November 2021 (UTC) GoingBatty, "Ayaelmelegy" got an indefinite block six hours before your last (and of course well-intentioned) message. -- Hoary (talk) 12:02, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Ongoing Events Section[edit] What happened with the ongoing events section on both the desktop website and the mobile website? It used to be a nicely categorized, bulleted set of news. But not it's just hyperlinks to specific wikipedia pages. I would use the previous style daily, it was a wonderful source for news. I wonder if there is a good reason for removing it, or if it was potentially even an oversight. Regardless I loved that feature and don't want to lose it :( 47.229.202.202 (talk) 01:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Are you confusing Portal:Current events/Sidebar and Portal:Current events? Both are linked from "In the news" on Main Page, on "Ongoing" and "Other recent events". PrimeHunter (talk) 02:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Rv tags[edit] Hello. Is it possible to remove tags? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Possibly - which tags were you considering removing, and why? GoingBatty (talk) 06:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @GoingBatty, no, I've no reason, I've seen some users who edit without any tags. So I asked. Can the tags be removed without any reason? Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 06:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: When tags are removed from an article, it's assumed that the problems they highlight have been resolved. If an editor feels that a tag was removed prematurely, they'll add it back at their own discretion. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Tenryuu, I didn't tell about the tags of article. I told about editing tags such as "2017 wikitext editor". Thank you. Richard Michael William (talk) 07:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: There is a difference between Wikipedia:Tags and Wikipedia:Templates I see you removed the {{under construction}} template from the Carlos Moguel Jr. article in this edit, but you cannot remove the tag "2017 wikitext editor" from the edit. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 07:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Richard Michael William: Those are not removable. —Tenryuu ? ( ? • ? ) 07:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Reftoolbar[edit] How to change the date format for Reftoolbar? from Dmy to mdy. Thanks. —It'sCtrlwiki • talk • 06:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Ctrlwiki: Welcome to the Teahouse! It appears that there is a discussion about this at Wikipedia talk:RefToolbar#Date formats. Hope this helps, and happy editing! GoingBatty (talk) 06:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) User level[edit] Hi, I wanted to know how I can add a user level. I mean there will be a bar on my user page, and it will fill up as I edit articles. And beside it would be written, my next user level. Any idea on how to do that? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Here's a workaround, Itcouldbepossible. Just edit articles, constructively. Soon you will be "extended confirmed". Most people are, and few people will be surprised or much interested to know that you are. There are some other very minor superpowers that you can acquire; but again, few people will be interested. Some superpowers are a bit out of the ordinary, and you might want to advertise one or other of these; on the other hand, advertising them may seem somewhat vulgar. Best is to aim to be an article-improving Clark Kent. -- Hoary (talk) 11:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible Welcome to Tea House! As @Itcouldbepossible stated, it's rarely of interest to anyone else. This essay on WP:HATCOLLECTING could be useful on the mostly harms/some benefits of gamifying your user page with statistics. I do indulge myself with Wikipedia:Service awards as a way of marking specific tiers of editing. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 12:57, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Dead Links[edit] I see that many pages have something called 'dead links'. What are these so called 'dead links', and how can I make them alive again?? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 09:48, 24 November 2021 (UTC) For information about dead links, read WP:Dead links. --David Biddulph (talk) 09:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David Biddulph Thanks again for the answer Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Add (journalist) to title[edit] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anshuman_Tiwari Can you write this in brackets as journalist because it is journalist? You can write Journalist in back of their name in brackets. Coolblack4 (talk) 10:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Coolblack4, and welcome to the Teahouse. We use a term in parenthesis like that in an article title only when it is necessary to distinguish between different people (or other subjects) with the same name. See WP:Disambiguation. --ColinFine (talk) 11:44, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Something drastic certainly should be done to this article. Sample: In digital journalism, he has created and successfully established an innovative and exclusive multilingual digital first content vertical moneybhaskar.com for Danik Bhaskar Group, DB Corp. It is the largest Hindi business portal and offers guidance, utility and wisdom based jargon free economic-business and investment content to aspiring readers in Hindi. (For one thing, I wonder what is being excluded.) -- Hoary (talk) 12:06, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Distracting AFC submission templates[edit] Does anyone know how to collapse or get the "this topic is not notable" AFC submission templates out of the way? I'm trying to work on a draft article, and they're distracting and take up about half of the page. wizzito | say hello! 12:43, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Those templates were put there for the benefit of reviewers, and of anyone who might want to work on improving the draft. You should not remove or collapse them. That's why they all say "Do not remove this line!" Maproom (talk) 13:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thing is, they are INCREDIBLY distracting to look at, I at least want to move them to the bottom at the page if I can't collapse or make them invisible. I just can't have them taking up 90% of the page from the top, it bothers me a lot and prevents me from working. wizzito | say hello! 13:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Draft:Reality shifting has been Declined three times and Rejected twice. I have restored the Declined and Rejection and Comments to the top of the article, where those belong. David notMD (talk) 14:23, 24 November 2021 (UTC) If you believe you can rescue this with better references, do so, but be aware that Rejected drafts are likely to be deleted and 'salted.' Make sure you have an off-Wikipedia copy. And understand that 'salted' means that an Administrator's approval would be needed to try again to create a draft on this topic. David notMD (talk) 14:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there seriously no way to get these to the bottom of the page (where they are still visible) or make them look less distracting? Your comments aren't helping me, sorry. Also, I am still working on the article; I had to rewrite it from scratch because the original user who created the draft made it look very bad and had bad formatting and grammar. (Also, they kept resubmitting it multiple times despite not addressing the concerns, I haven't submitted it yet.) It isn't anything speedy deletable (see Wikipedia:Drafts are not checked for notability or sanity), there's a Washington Post report and a scholarly article on the subject, but probably just needs to be worked on and more RS might need to be made before it gets published. wizzito | say hello! 14:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Declines and Rejections are considered a required part of draft history, so that the next reviewer can check if the weaknesses identified by previous reviewers have been addressed. Given that you have taken over a draft created and edited by other editors, you can leave a Comment to that effect with the other Comments. David notMD (talk) 14:39, 24 November 2021 (UTC) David notMD is there no way to at least move it to a part of the page where it's visible by people contributing and reviewers, but not as distracting as a glob that takes up the first part of the page? If not, I may just have to move it to my userspace and work on it from there. wizzito | say hello! 14:42, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @David notMD noting for the record I have reverted you; @Wizzito offers up a convincing reason why they moved them down, because it was distracting for them, and as long as they move them back up before resubmitting I see no issue with that move. That is ignoring the question whether or not these templates are relevant at all considering the rewrite currently ongoing, although it appears that at least some of the original text still exists. -- Asartea Talk | Contribs 15:40, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I have added a Comment that you are in the process of completely revising the draft. Do as much as you can before submitting. I know nothing about the topic, but will mention that as it stand now, the lead is over-referenced. Pick at most three refs to support the Lead. Those refs and the others may be used in the body of the article, as more detail on history, reception, criticism, etc. is added. David notMD (talk) 14:47, 24 November 2021 (UTC) That's because I was working on it, putting the references in so I can use them later, and then delete the ref in the lead when I've finished reviewing the source and using it to source statements. You act like a draft should have the same standards as mainspace, and besides, I moved it to userspace anyways so I can work on it. wizzito | say hello! 14:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You didn't move it, you copied & pasted the content, so please read about copying within Wikipedia. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I want to pitch in from an outside editor. 5 declined templates, 2 separate comments, and 1 draft template? I know if I was unaware of all Wikipedia policies, this would feel very WP:BITEy to me. Is there not a better solution, in the form of an {{articlehistory}} style template? I understand why the need for all the notices (for future reviewers to know at a glance), but there can be so many better ways to do this now. --JackFromWisconsin (talk | contribs) 14:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I feel like a lot of people in this thread are being BITEy too... wizzito | say hello! 15:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My intention was to proffer advice on how to create a draft that is more likely to be accepted. David notMD (talk) 15:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I understand, but I feel as if my questions weren't answered and were just met with a "don't do this" or "don't do that" and reverts. wizzito | say hello! 15:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia:Tendentious editing[edit] This is not marked as an essay. This is also not marked with the green symbol for policy, guidelines pages. So, how important are these types of guideline pages? Knight Skywalker (talk) 12:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Very important. It's a supplementary explantion to the guideline WP:DE, and carries the same status. Mjroots (talk) 13:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Mjroots: If this is very important, then why Wikipedia is not including the green symbol in the box? --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:13, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I didn't use the bold format, but still the above lines are showing as in bold to me. --Knight Skywalker (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You used the bold format by putting a semi-colon before the colon at the start of the line. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) I've fixed the bold. Mjroots (talk) 16:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) This page is not one of Wikipedia's policies or guidelines, as it has not been thoroughly vetted by the community. Also it has category. Wikipedia essays (?) (±) Knight Skywalker (talk) 17:11, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Wikipedia Markup[edit] Is there any introduction page, or help page, or user guide page for Wikipedia Markup. If there is then please provide me. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hi Itcouldbepossible, you may be looking for Help:Wikitext. DanCherek (talk) 14:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek Thanks for the Wiki Help page, I am surely going to read it. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:17, 24 November 2021 (UTC) My Talk Page[edit] As you see now, my talk page has become a little clumsy. What is the way to make it clean? Should I archive them or is there any other option? Seeking for options. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 13:58, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: While you're allowed to delete conversations from your own talk page, archiving is recommended because it makes it more convenient for you and other editors to find those old conversations in the future. There are a few different ways to archive a talk page – you can do it manually or have a bot help you – and there is more information about each of those at Help:Archiving a talk page. DanCherek (talk) 14:22, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @DanCherek I have archived the archival messages left by a bot on my talk page and have shifted them here. But I cannot move the three notification to three different headings, it is coming under a single heading. Please can you help me in that respect. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The first section starts with {| so you need to end it with |}. --David Biddulph (talk) 14:30, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Newcomers[edit] How, can I find all newcomers on Wikipedia??? Itcouldbepossible (talk) 14:08, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Itcouldbepossible: You can find them at Special:Log/newusers but for what purpose ? 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA (talk) 15:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) IP blocking for 31 hours[edit] Hello, Teahouse hosts… I hope you don’t mind me asking this question: When administrators impose a block on IP addresses for the first time, the length of the block is usually 31 hours (1 day, 7 hours). Do you have any idea why administrators chose this value? Thanks. — 3PPYB6 — TALK — CONTRIBS — SANDBOXES — LOGS — 15:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC). It's so that they don't just wait 24 and return to the same things. 31h is also a standard length in the blocking dropdown menu and has been since before I was an admin. —A little blue Bori v^_^v Jéské Couriano 15:56, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Imagine a kid messing around in study hall, causing a school's IP to be blocked. A 24-hour block would allow him or her to come back the next day during the same period to cause more trouble. Deor (talk) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Amkgp is Sock editing[edit] Hi, first I was blocked on the ground of thinking to be a sockpuppet, and the sockpuppet investigation was raised by an ipv6 ip 2402:3A80:6E1:9A2E:A110:65A0:5AD7:4F15. The sock investigation page is here. In the Clerk, CheckUser, and/or patrolling admin comments section Blablubbs commented and said The filer is obviously Amkgp loutsocking. I blocked them for a bit. Then after the block expired then again another comment was added by ipv6 user 2402:3A80:1A4E:9197:C5B8:CED1:C0FD:9A1D, and then blablubbs blocked the ipv6 again. When it was proved that I am not a sockpuppet, this ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:A17E:9C61:AA1F:59E2:32A2 came and added welcomed me. Till date, I could not understand anything, why an ipv6 was coming an leaving me messages on my talk page. Today again an ipv6 2402:3A80:1A4C:6E8:43C:D3FB:1E1F:28CA came and gave me a vandalism warning on an edit that I made two articles namely, Piet van der Sluijs and Dré Saris, where I had only added a more reference needted tag using twinkle. It was my mistake or not is a far matter, but then he leaves me another link to learn wikipedia in under an hour link. He also answers one of my questions in the teahouse. The thing is all these ipv6 start with 2402:3A80, and blablubbs has stated previously that it is block evasion of sock amkgp. Now what is to be done? Should I raise a sockpuppet investigation request?? Would it be possible to block just huge range ipv6s? Please give me suggestion in this matter. Itcouldbepossible (talk) 16:20, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Also in there sockpuppet investigation page [[5]] we can see that the suspected sock puppets ipv6 also starts with 2402:3A80. We can also see that he got blocked because he used to edit logged out for a couple of time, and he was blocked for that reason. And also in a further section we see that he also used or uses 2409:4061::/36 this ipv6 range. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Itcouldbepossible (talk • contribs) 16:24, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Article Not Published - not adequate sources[edit] Hi, I am trying to publish an article about a triceratops skull nicknamed 'Dragon King' which was sold last year which is the biggest skull ever found, but the article was rejected due to a lack of sources. The sale was private so there wasn't a lot of press generated, but what there was is referenced. The skull is definitely the biggest in the world. How would I go about validating that? Would an image of the skull with dimensions count? What could I use to validate it. Any suggestions would be very welcome. I should make clear that I have no financial stake in this at all, it is simply a fact that the skull is the biggest found and I think should be public information. Maudjohnson90 (talk) 16:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Maudjohnson90 Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Wikipedia articles summarize what publicly available independent reliable sources say about a topic. If a topic is not sufficiently covered in such sources, it cannot be on Wikipedia. Documents in private hands or otherwise not available to the public cannot be used as sources here. Did no sources cover this sale, or its discovery? If some did, but not enough for a standalone article, there may be an existing article this could be mentioned in. 331dot (talk) 16:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Shouldn't you first put any reliable information at Triceratops#Size, Maudjohnson90? That's a pretty well-watched article and if you think that particular skull needs another full article, you could discuss that on the Talk Page at Talk:Triceratops Mike Turnbull (talk) 16:59, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks Mike Turnbull! I have added information under Triceratops#Skull and that has remained since I added it. I'll discuss on the Talk Page as suggested. — Preceding unsigned comment added by Maudjohnson90 (talk • contribs) 17:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Final Publish[edit] Hello Sir, how much time does it take for the draft to get finally published ? Thank you. Johnalphanso (talk) 17:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You have not created nor submitted a draft to Articles for Creation. Is there a particular draft you are interested in? — Preceding unsigned comment added by David notMD (talk • contribs) 18:09, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Hello, Johnalphanso, and welcome to the Teahouse. There is no simple answer to your quewstion: a draft takes as long to be published as it takes. There is no queue, no schedule, no deadline: all editors are volunteers, and work on what they choose when they choose. If you're talking about Draft:Sanskar Desai, that will not get reviewed until it is submitted for review (add {{subst:AFC/draft}} to the top). But it will not get accepted until somebody follows Theroadislong's advice in the comment and removes all the unreliable sources from the list. It will likely not get accepted until somebody reformats the references from a useless list of URLs to a meaningful set of citations - see CITE. There are probably other things that need improving too: in particular, the question of whether it has been worked on by a paid editor. --ColinFine (talk) 18:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) How do I contribute images?[edit]  Bettertoseeit (talk) 19:29, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Bettertoseeit Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. Please review WP:UPIMAGE carefully. It's not as easy to do as it may appear. You must be autoconfirmed(account is four days old with 10 edits or more) to upload images yourself, but you can visit Files for upload to get assistance with doing so if not autoconfirmed. 331dot (talk) 19:54, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Creating Book Pages[edit] Hello. One of the reasons I became an editor was an interest in filling some of the gaps in bibliographies I am familiar with. What I'm unsure about is if an author has a large bibliography with Wiki articles already created for most of their books (for example; Stephen Baxter bibliography), am I safe in assuming I can create pages for those novels which do not have an article, or might the lack of an article be for a reason? Thanks in advance. John Bullock (talk) 20:01, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Such novels still have to be independently notable. Ruslik_Zero 20:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Jbullock83 Welcome to Tea House! In general, a notable author does not mean their books are automatically notable and vice versa, see WP:NOTINHERIT, however in the book specific Wikipedia:Notability (books) guidelines, it does mention certain famous authors' books are likely to be automatically notable. Anything by Jane G. Austin for example, but another editor may disagree. Looking at specific notability criteria for the books themselves would be the most forward process. Happy editing! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 20:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Thanks for the info/reply! Ruslik, Shushugah. John Bullock (talk) 21:32, 24 November 2021 (UTC) ASIAN MONTH[edit] i would like to ask if my translated ( not fully complete article counts for the ediathon asian month in order to get a postcard Georgekagian (talk) 21:37, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian Welcome to Tea House! Your question is better asked on Wikipedia talk:Wikipedia Asian Month/2021 but if you add {{WAM talk 2021}} to the talk page of said article, a WikiProject judge will determine its eligibility for you. I doubt a full translation is needed, since each article can be independently edited anyways. It needs to comply with English Wikipedia WP:5 Principles whereas it may differ in other languages. Thank you for the question and happy editing! Good luck with the edit-a-thon! ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 21:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @Georgekagian, looking at here, it looks like it counts unless it was a pure machine translation (e.g. Google Translate) that you didn't copy edit to correct any errors. {{u|Sdkb}}?talk 21:50, 24 November 2021 (UTC) What did I do wrong?[edit] I'm the guy who created the article for Legends of the Multiverse: Draft:Legends of the Multiverse, just wondering why you rejected it? LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Hello and welcome to the Teahouse. The reason for the decline(not rejection) was left by the reviewer at the top of the draft. Do you have specific questions about it? 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) In short, your draft seems to have no sources. 331dot (talk) 22:10, 24 November 2021 (UTC) The fan film does not have any progress on the production yet, why do you expect it to be full of sources? Sources will only be added during production. (also i'm new here on wikipedia so i don't know what exactly are sources) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:15, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Please review what a reliable source is. If no independent reliable sources have written about your film, showing how it meets the special Wikipedia definition of a notable film, it cannot be written about on Wikipedia. Wikipedia is not a place to just tell about something. If you have further comment, please edit this existing section, instead of creating additional sections. Please also review conflict of interest. 331dot (talk) 22:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) "Legends of the Multiverse is widely regarded as among one of the greatest film series ever made", but "Production will begin in 5 December 2021." I see why this draft has been described as a blatant hoax. Maproom (talk) 22:31, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Calculating and "fixing" Hubble's Constant using light speed (C) and Pi only.[edit] Is it possible to to use the following equation as a Hubble Constant value for reference purposes only on the Hubble Chart page? It is unique in the fact no measuring processes are involved, so accuracy of Hubble's Constant is as good as the inputted speed of light :-  2 X a Megaparsec X C, divided by Pi to the power of 21 =  71 Kilometres / Second / Megaparsec
 For this equation, a Parsec is the standard 3.26 light years. C is light speed in Kilometres / Second, and Pi is 3.142....... This equation "fixes" Hubble's Constant directly and precisely to light speed (C) and Pi. As this equation is original, there are no references, but it has been tested, and has successfully withstood many challenges since 2008. I am quite happy if it were used anonymously, due to the fact there are no references. The lack of external references was (rightly) the reason it was rejected as a stand alone article / submission. No copyrights are involved, as it is purely lifted from my work (Astrogeometry), and is not the work of anyone else I feel its anonymous inclusion on the Hubble Chart page would stimulate new interest in what has now become a "Hubble Constant stalemate". Sincerely, ClownBojo ClownBojo (talk) 22:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Interesting. The same theory was advanced several years ago here on Wikipedia by a user named David Michael Hine. Wikignome Wintergreentalk 22:35, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Please read no original research, ClownBojo. Unless several independent people have written about the equation in reliable sources, it does not belong in Wikipedia. Period. --ColinFine (talk) 23:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong?[edit] But the movie is overall just an idea from my mind, I'm actually making this movie with my two best friends. So technically, I wouldn't call it a "hoax" since it's actually coming to YouTube. Did you even read the entire article? If you don't want an article related to my fan film in this site, where else do I put it? (p.s. irrelevant question: do you like the idea of my fan film trilogy?) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 22:45, 24 November 2021 (UTC) "where else do I put it?" Facebook, maybe. Maproom (talk) 22:49, 24 November 2021 (UTC) LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI Yes, Wikpedia is not for people to tell the world about what they do. When the New York Times or CNN or BBC write about your film, then someone independent of you will write an article about it. Until then, you will need to use social media. 331dot (talk) 22:53, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Re: Re: Re: Re: What did I do wrong?[edit] I don't use Facebook and which specific social media do I share the movie's existence? LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI (talk) 23:05, 24 November 2021 (UTC) @LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI anywhere else but here. Please stop creating a new section for each question. ~ ? Shushugah (he/him • talk) 23:07, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Make a YouTube video telling the world that you are making a film. 331dot (talk) 23:12, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Basically I think you may benefit from reading WP:NOT & internalizing what it says about what Wikipedia is not, you may find it imperative. Celestina007 (talk) 23:19, 24 November 2021 (UTC) You can also have a look at WP:OUT, LoudCasaGumInsanityBFDI. --ColinFine (talk) 23:21, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Fair use[edit] Why are fair use resolutions lowered? It doesn’t make sense that Wikipedia lowers resolution on fair use images. Other wikis don’t do this. Alex Mitchell of The Goodies (talk) 23:25, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Asian month[edit] I try to sumbit my article in the asian month ediathon-contest in order to get a postcard but its not working. The link that wikipedia has shared is broken it says error 500 please any help? Georgekagian (talk) 23:27, 24 November 2021 (UTC) Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Teahouse&oldid=1057021003" Categories: Wikipedia Teahouse Wikipedia help forums Hidden categories: Noindexed pages Project pages with short description Non-talk pages that are automatically signed Pages that should not be manually archived Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Namespaces Project page Talk Variants expanded collapsed Views Read Edit View history More expanded collapsed Search Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Tools What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Languages ??????? ????? ?eština Dansk Deutsch Français ?????? Bahasa Indonesia Magyar ?????? ????? ???? Norsk bokmål ????? ???? Polski Português ??????? ????????? ???? ?????? / srpski Svenska ????? ???? ?? Edit links This page was last edited on 24 November 2021, at 23:27 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement